Nokia and Oracle collaborate on next generation telecommunication subscriber registers
2006-02-15 09:35:54

Nokia, the world leader in mobile communications, and Oracle, the world's largest enterprise software company, today 

announced an agreement under which Nokia can use Oracle's Carrier Grade Framework product offering in its next generation 

telecommunication subscriber register solution. Subscriber registers are essential to maintain real-time information about 

mobile and converged network users.

 Nokia plans to incorporate Oracle's technologies into Nokia's next generation telecommunication subscriber register 

solution. Nokia is today one of the leading suppliers of Home Location Register (HLRs), providing extremely reliable systems

and the highest transaction capacities for the subscriber database needs of telecom networks.

Nokia will build on its strong HLR capabilities and enhance its existing register solutions to cover all requirements for 

real-time subscriber data demanded by existing and new services in both mobile and converged networks.

"Nokia is already the world leader in 3GPP Release 4 mobile softswitches, HLR, and IP multimedia solutions," said Christian 

Fredrikson, Vice President, Networks, Nokia. "And developing a single on-line subscriber register solution is the natural 

next step in the evolution of our register offering. With this cooperation, we and Oracle join forces to establish a winning solution for mobile and converged operators. The solution will provide greater flexibility in creating new subscriber services, enhanced capabilities for subscriber provisioning, and increased savings in operational costs."

"Collaborating with Nokia on its single on-line subscriber register solution enables us to provide telecom operators and 

service providers with a cost-effective foundation for bringing exciting new services faster to market," said Lars 

Wahlstrom, Vice President, Telecom & Media, Oracle Europe, Middle East and Africa. "The data management solution of Oracle 

Carrier Grade Framework is based on Oracle 10g and Oracle TimesTen In-Memory database technologies. It highlights the 

carrier grade features and options of these Oracle products, ideally suited for today's Network Element Providers and ISVs 

developing next generation network solutions for the telecommunications industry."

About Oracle
Oracle (NASDAQ: ORCL) is the world's largest enterprise software company. For more information about Oracle, visit our Web site at http://www.oracle.com.

About Nokia
Nokia is a world leader in mobile communications, driving the growth and sustainability of the broader mobility industry. Nokia connects people to each other and the information that matters to them with easy-to-use and innovative products like mobile phones, devices and solutions for imaging, games, media and businesses. Nokia provides equipment, solutions and services for network operators and corporations.

- Nokia

