
Universal Mobile
Telecommunication System

UMTS is the evolution of the GSM network to go
from 2G to 3G networks

¡¤Based on 3GPP standard
¡¤Wideband radio access solution supporting
multimedia applications
¡¤Personalized services for the masses
UMTS is based on GSM air interface and architecture.
It allows for services up to approximately 115 bits per
second and is based on Wideband Code Division
Multiple Access (WCDMA). UMTS is designed for high
service flexibility.
UMTS supports multimedia services up to 384 kilobits
per second in wide area coverage and up to 2 megabits
per second in short range coverage.
GSM and UMTS provide access to an evolved GSM
core network and allow mobile access to Internet
services.
WCDMA is rapidly emerging as the leading global thirdgeneration
(IMT-2000) standard, providing simultaneous
support for a wide range of services with
different characteristics on a common 5 MHz carrier.
The current WCDMA specification fully satisfies the IMT-
2000 requirements, including support for data rates of up to
2 megabits per second in indoor or small-cell outdoor
environments, wide-area coverage at rates of up to 384
kilobits per second, and support for high-rate packet-data
and circuit-switched services. Thus, the introduction of
third-generation cellular systems allows operators to offer a
vast selection of services to meet subscriber demands.
Ericsson¡¯s WCDMA products are positioned to guarantee
cost-effective delivery of these services.
Ericsson, the world¡¯s leading supplier of
3G mobile systems
UMTS/WCDMA is a reality and commercially available now.
Ericsson has been named as vendor in 37 out of 72 publicly
announced WCDMA agreements announced to date and
has a global market share of 40 percent. Through these
contacts, Ericsson has shipped over 20,000 3G WCDMA
base stations across the globe.
UMTS requirements
Multimedia Service Requirements
? High data rates
? At least 384 kbps wide-area coverage
? Up to 2 Mbps indoor and low-range outdoor
coverage
? High service flexibility
? Packet- and circuit-oriented services
? Wide range of bit rates with high granularity
? Multiple services on one connection
Additional requirements
? Improved capacity/coverage compared to GSM
? Easy deployment, e.g. no frequency planning
? Dual-mode/coexistence with GSM
? Terminal implementation/Harmonized parameters
? Handoff between UMTS and GSM
UMTS services:
¡¤ World wide roaming will be enabled.
¡¤ Satellite positioning => Location-based services.
¡¤ Access to an involved GSM network.
¡¤ Packet- and circuit-oriented services.
¡¤ Multiple services on one connection.
¡¤ WAP based internet browsing
UMTS products:
¡¤ Dual-mode phones UMTS / GSM (including GPRS and
HSCSD).
¡¤ Multi tasking Communicators
WCDMA Trial System
Ericsson has created a WCDMA trial system which is
essentially ¡®3G in a box¡¯. The box contains a complete,
end-to-end solution housed in two standard containers -
everything from real, commercial core network and radio
access network systems, to application and handsets.
Ericsson has worked with its partners to develop a
portfolio of 3G applications for the WCDMA trial system
that demonstrate the unique features and benefits of
WCDMA and the possibilities of Mobile Internet.
The WCDMA trial system is standards-based, preconfigured
and pre-tested - ready for you to get working in
a matter of days, rather than weeks.
The Sony Ericsson Z1010 dual-mode 3G
phone
The Z1010 focuses on easy-to-use multimedia messaging,
taking advantage of the capacity and capability of 3G
networks. For this, the clamshell Z1010 features two
displays and two cameras. The main display is a full
graphic 65K color display and a gray scale status display
is located on the front panel of the phone, for easy access
to information when the phone is closed.
The integrated camera is easy to use for capturing still
images and video, which can then be sent as MMS or email.
There is also a dedicated video call camera placed
below the main display, so while the camera is filming the
user, he or she can watch the other party in the display. To
be able to easily move information between the Z1010 and
other devices, as well as for memory extension, the phone
features Sony Memory Stick Duo¢â technology which
makes it easy to transfer images, video clips and music
files to and from the phone.
Ericsson
www.ericsson.com
government.space@ericsson.com
EUS/RL/W-03:0075
(C) Ericsson AB 2003
Ericsson¡¯s WCDMA Trial System
Sony Ericsson¡¯s Z1010