
Intel Joins SKT, NHN for Home Entertainment

Intel Tuesday introduced its new multimedia PC platform Viiv, which converges computers, 
TVs and the Internet into one digital home entertainment system. 
The world¡¯s leading computer chip maker held a press conference in Seoul on Monday, 
and demonstrated the Viiv PCs that will replace the existing Pentium platform. 

Intel also announced partnerships with South Korean firms SK Telecom and NHN. 
The two firms will provide music, movie and online game contents to the Viiv home entertainment system. 

``People want digital entertainments like movies, music, games on big screen television, 
and that¡¯s where they belong,¡¯¡¯ said Don MacDonald, vice president and general manager of Intel, 
in his keynote speech at Grand Hilton Hotel in Seoul. 
``We believe that¡¯s what we want and that¡¯s what we are trying to deliver.¡¯¡¯ 

The new platform is composed of Intel¡¯s Centrino dual-core processors, 
chipsets and network controllers. It can perform as a home entertainment hub, 
which provides games, music, and movies and e-mail service on TV screens using a remote control. 

The Viiv PCs will be made by some 30 PC manufacturers, such as Samsung, LG, TriGem and many others. 
It will use Microsoft¡¯s Media Center Edition (MCE) as its operating system. 

SK Telecom, the nation¡¯s largest mobile carrier, 
is providing its on-demand music and music video download service Melon. 
The company also plans to launch its famous Internet community service Cyworld for Viiv soon. 

South Korea¡¯s leading Internet company NHN also joined the Intel team. 
NHN will provide its movie and video file streaming service via Naver, 
the largest Internet portal in South Korea, as well as its Hangame online game portal. 

``Intel is not a service company. We are a chip company, or well, 
we are a platform company that sells chips and software. That¡¯s how we get paid. 
But the design of Viiv is intended to allow to user to continue to get more update when they want to,¡¯¡¯ 
MacDonald told The Korea Times after the conference.

Intel¡¯s plan to use TV as the home entertainment hub has already become an industry fashion recently. 
Microsoft is pushing its high-end game machine Xbox 360 as the multimedia entertainment unit. 
IPod manufacturer Apple also has similar features with its iMac PCs.

MacDonald said that the Viiv PCs are distinguished from those market competitors for its simplicity 
and flexibility open-structure. 

``It¡¯s an open standard so you can use anybody¡¯s product. 
So if we decide to add a new feature to Viiv platform, we can make that available to users very easily,¡¯¡¯
MacDonald said. ``Although Apple has similar philosophy, they have a different approach. 
They prefer to have only Apple devices connected.¡¯¡¯ 

Intel also unveiled its Centrino Duo platform for laptops on the same day. 
Previously code-named Napa, the Centrino Duo technology uses two mobile processing cores on one chip, 
therefore providing enhanced 3-D graphics and improved multi-tasking ability. 

The company also insisted that the new laptops using the new technology is 70 percent faster 
than current models and spend 30 percent less energy, which means more battery life to users.

Intel aims to sell 1 million units worldwide in only three weeks. 

