IP Telephony on Your Mobile Phone 

IPdrum, a Swedish-Norwegian company making strides in the VOIP market, announced Tuesday the global launch of its flagship product, the Mobile Skype Cable.

The new Cable essentially bridges Internet telephony with mobile phone networks to enable users to make worldwide calls, while on the go. 

"Finally there is a telecom solution offering the best of both worlds; mobility and free Internet calls," Kjetil B. Mathisen, CEO of IPdrum, said in a statement. 

The new cable, in conjunction with IPdrum software, utilizes the mobile phone as a gateway to grant users access to Skype Technologies' free Internet telephony services, the company said. 

IPdrum's Mobile Skype Cable links a user's (retired) mobile, or base phone to USB and sound ports on their computer, while patent-pending software connects a second mobile device (the users current cell phone) to Skype's VOIP application, according to a recent news release. 

Users can then access Skype's p2p phone service to make international calls (without incurring roaming charges) to other Skype users or non-subscribers, via the SkypeOut service. 

Additionally, users can opt to forward all incoming Skype calls to a certain phone. 

IPdrum Cable users with friends-and-family-esque wireless services (which allow them to make free calls to certain, pre-determined people) can use the Skype VOIP application to place free phone calls to anywhere in the world. 

However, for users without that type of contract, international calls can be made at local call rates, the company said. 

"Skype's recent acquisition by eBay is the software's natural ticket to the masses," said Jerry Pettersson, IPdrum founder, in a statement. 

"IPdrum's technology automatically extends Skype's reach and triggers a welcome transformation to the ease and affordability of communication in the 21st century." 

The IPdrum cable functions in virtually any location (no need to search for a "hotspot"), and currently supports Windows XP. 

Plans to support additional operating systems in the future are under way. 

The Mobile Skype Cable is compatible with Nokia and Sony Ericsson base phones and will soon become available to Motorola, Samsung and Siemens users. 

The product retails for $69.95 plus tax, and is for sale online and in retail stores across Europe and Asia.
