			        Optoelectronics

Flash module vs. LED as light source for mobile phone digital camera applications
By Rick Yeo

				Introduction

The popularity of mobile phones with digital camera features is growing steadily and, as with other popular electronic devices, demand for higher quality by the consumer means manufacturers must constantly improve their product line. One improvement that PerkinElmer Optoelectronics is bringing to market is the replacement of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) with superior flash modules as the light source for high quality mobile phone cameras. 
In Japan, the digital camera is already a common feature provided with mobile phones. As its popularity moves into
other areas of the world, manufacturers must offer the highest quality available or be stifled by the competition. With
that in mind, when it comes to the camera¡¯s light source, flash modules provide major benefits over traditional LEDs.
With nearly 420 million people using mobile phones and only about 5% providing a camera feature, the market for
mobile digital camera phones is poised for rapid growth ? and with it, a demand for higher-end products that will require
the benefits only provided by these new flash modules.

			LED vs. LED vs. flash flash

The majority of mobile camera phones on the market today use LEDs. The LED is smaller in size and easily
incorporated into the phone. The LED also eliminates any need for a charge delay before the light source is ready for
the next shot, while flash modules require about six seconds to recharge. However, this is where the LED advantages
leave off and the benefits of flash modules begin.
The biggest and most obvious advantage of a flash module is shear light output. LEDs have very low light output, less
than 5 Luxs at a distance of 0.2 meters with 2x4 LEDs. The flash module provides about 400 times the light output of
typical LEDs with the same at 1.8 watts per flash.
The allowable distribution of the flash module¡¯s light output can also be projected more evenly over the area being
photographed. This light distribution has a direct impact on the photographic quality of the print. For the new higher end
mega-pixel cameras demanded by today¡¯s technology-savvy consumers, only flash modules
distribute enough light for high quality results.
The angle of illumination and distribution is enhanced in flash modules by designing in a
reflector and lens. Although there are some LED packages being sold on the market that
include a reflector, the light output poor in comparison to flash modules.
www. p e r k i n e l m e r. c o m / o p t o e l e c t ronics
Flash module vs. Flash module vs. LED as light sour LED as light source f ce for mobile phone digital camera applications or mobile phone digital camera applications
Page 2
Flash modules also have the advantage of providing a pulse light, as opposed to an LED¡¯s continuous light. The pulse
light acts like a shutter to sharpen the quality of the photographs. Continuous light, though better for streaming video, is
not nearly as useful for photography. With a moving object, such as a vehicle being photographed by a traffic control
camera, pulse light provides a very sharp picture of the motorist¡¯s license plate number.
Another advantage of flash modules is the color temperature they provide. LEDs have a color temperature of about 8500
K which results in a bluish light ? not ideal for taking still pictures. With a flash module, the pulse light¡¯s color temperature
is closer to sunlight, or between 5500 K and 6000 K. This is the ideal color temperature for still photography.
Cost is always a factor to be reckoned with when improving product lines. However, in the case of LED vs. flash light
sources for mobile phone cameras, it¡¯s actually less expensive to buy the superior component. Currently, flash modules
are less than half the cost of LEDs.

			     Work in progress

As the demand for higher quality surges in the mobile camera phone industry, the manufacturers must take steps to
improve their products. Although some low-end products will still be in demand and satisfied by LED light sources,
producing high-end, quality camera phones capable of producing sharp, clear, color photographs will require the use of
flash modules.
While last year¡¯s product offerings were mainly 0.3 mega-pixel cameras, the market is expected to progress towards 1.3
mega-pixel cameras that can provide better quality pictures, but require higher light output that only flash modules can
provide. With that in mind, companies like PerkinElmer Optoelectronics are working hard toward overcoming the few
obstacles still faced by flash module technology.
Miniaturization of flash products is making it possible to attain the size requirements for flash modules that will parallel
those of the LED. Flashlamps and other components are gradually shrinking in size. PerkinElmer recently rolled out a 1.8
mm diameter lamp. They also provide a flash module solution that includes the lamp as well as the circuitry to drive the
lamp ? and the miniaturization efforts continue.

				Conclusion

As mobile phone digital camera manufacturers realize the benefits of flash module light sources over LEDs, high quality,
high reliability products are sure to follow. For low-end phone cameras, an LED may be sufficient for photography. But as
manufacturers move toward the higher mega-pixel products, flash becomes necessary for better lighting and sharper
pictures.
PerkinElmer Optoelectronics is leading the way in breaking down the technical obstacles to designing flash modules for
mobile camera phone applications. Already bringing lower cost, more light output, better light distribution and better
quality results to the table, work is continuing toward miniaturization, reducing power consumption, and educating people
about the many benefits of flash modules. These components will enable manufacturers to set higher standards in
quality and reliability in today¡¯s mobile camera phone market.


¨Ï 2003 PerkinElmer, Inc. All rights reserved. PerkinElmer, the PerkinElmer logo and the stylized ¡°P¡± are trademarks of PerkinElmer, Inc. AN339-0703
For more information e-mail us at opto@perkinelmer.com or visit our website at www.perkinelmer.com/optoelectronics
All values are nominal; specifications subject to change without notice.
North America:
PerkinElmer Optoelectronics
44370 Christy Street
Fremont, CA 94538
Toll Free: (800) 775-6786
Phone: +1 (510) 979-6500
Fax: +1 (510) 687-1140
Asia:
PerkinElmer Optoelectronics
47 Ayer Rajah Crescent #06-12
Singapore 139947
Phone: +65-6770-4370
Fax: +65-6777-2196