The basement doesn't have to be just a place to store boxes with things you are never going to use, but it can be used also as a great entertainment hideout. A home theater in basement is a really good match. The lack of sunlight and the isolation from outside life suddenly becomes an important asset. 
I always wanted to have dedicated room for home theater for movies because I never watch TV. The whole idea to adjust my own time to the TV time is for me totally upside down. It is like getting a schedule from your doctor when you are allow to be sick.
After taking some measurements and looking at the unfinished basement from every corner I decided to divide it and build a whole new room. 
 
 Being a computer geek, of course a first thing I did was took all measurements and enter it to a CAD system and then started building a "soft-version". 
It is important to measure also all pipes or other construction obstacles and build a room "around" them. 
In my plans I created a rectangle room. First half will be the squarish cinema room with one wall used for a screen. The ceiling of this room will be inset hexagonal. This will not only look interesting but the created overhead will in fact cover all the furnaces and pipes in the basement ceiling. Also the sides of hexagon will be used as a cool ceiling light. The second part of the room will be used for archive of DVD's (and stack of chips...).
 
 At this phase I also pick colors to see the whole feel of the room. I decided to go with a red carpet, brown walls and blue hexagonal ceiling which will be lighted by the sides of hexagon. I also picked places for other lights and place for the projector and speakers. 
The walls will be covered with a red curtains not only for esthetic reasons, but also for pure acoustic.

A two columns will surround the screen. This, together with the hexagonal ceiling will make the room look a lot bigger and more theater-like. You know, I wont settle just for a simple room.
 
 Designing a room in a CAD system isn't just for the effect. Once the room is laid out I can get measures of any parts of the design and prepare materials. 
For example when I will go to build my overhead for the ceiling I can simply measure the parts in software and buy and cut them to the exact size.
 
 But I didn't stop just designing the "big" things. I went as far as designing the cabinets for overhead down to the wood pieces I need to use. 
This is a big help for somebody like me who has no great experience in carpentry. It certainly saves a lot of material especially when you build something which doesn't have right angles.

There are many CAD programs (many of them are too complex) or home designer software (many of them are too simple) which will help you in the designing.

In this illustrated guide I will show you all the steps I had to go through building a home theater in spring 2002 and also many tips and tricks.
 
