MP3
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to: navigation, search
For other uses, see MP3 (disambiguation).
MPEG-1 Audio Layer 3, more commonly referred to as MP3, is a popular digital audio encoding and lossy 
compression format, designed to greatly reduce the amount of data required to represent audio, yet 
still sound like a faithful reproduction of the original uncompressed audio to most listeners. It
 was invented by a team of German engineers who worked in the framework of the EUREKA 147 DAB digital 
radio research program, and it became an ISO/IEC standard in 1991.

[edit] Overview
MP3 is an audio-specific compression format. It provides a representation of pulse-code modulation-encoded 
audio in much less space than straightforward methods, by using psychoacoustic models to discard components
 less audible to human hearing, and recording the remaining information in an efficient manner. Similar 
principles are used by JPEG, a lossy image compression format.

The MP3 format uses a hybrid transformation to transform a time domain signal into a frequency domain signal:

32-band polyphase quadrature filter. 
36 or 12 tap MDCT; size can be selected independently for sub-bands 0...1 and 2...31. 
Aliasing reduction postprocessing. 
MP3 audio can be compressed with several different bit rates, providing a range of tradeoffs between data 
size and sound quality.

The MPEG specifications support Advanced audio coding (AAC) from MPEG-4 as MP3's successor, although 
other new audio formats have also achieved similar usage levels. However, MP3's extreme popularity 
makes it secure in its dominant position for the near future, with support from a huge range of software 
and hardware, including portable MP3 players and even some DVD and CD players. The large MP3 collections
 that many individuals have amassed will also ensure its longevity, in the same way as with any physical 
medium.

[edit] Development
MPEG-1 Audio Layer 2 encoding began as the Digital Audio Broadcast (DAB) project managed by Egon Meier-Engelen o
f the Deutsche Forschungs- und Versuchsanstalt fur Luft- und Raumfahrt (later on called Deutsches Zentrum fur 
Luft- und Raumfahrt, German Aerospace Center) in Germany. This project was financed by the European Union as
 a part of the EUREKA research program where it was commonly known as EU-147. EU-147 ran from 1987 to 1994.

In 1991, there were two proposals available: Musicam (known as Layer 2), and ASPEC (Adaptive Spectral 
Perceptual Entropy Coding). The Musicam technique, as proposed by Philips (The Netherlands), CCETT 
(France) and Institut fur Rundfunktechnik (Germany) was chosen due to its simplicity and error robustness,
 as well as its low computational power associated to the encoding of high quality compressed audio. 
The Musicam format, based on sub-band encoding, was a key to settle the basis of the MPEG Audio compression
 format (sampling rates, structure of frames, headers, number of samples per frame). Its technology and 
ideas were fully incorporated into the definition of ISO MPEG Audio Layer I and Layer II and further on of 
the Layer III (MP3) format. Under the chairmanship of Professor Mussmann (University of Hannover) the editing 
of the standard was made under the responsibilities of Leon van de Kerkhof (Layer I) and Gerhard Stoll (Layer II).

A working group consisting of Leon Van de Kerkhof (The Netherlands), Gerhard Stoll (Germany), Leonardo
 Chiariglione (Italy), Yves-Francois Dehery (France), Karlheinz Brandenburg (Germany) took ideas from
 Musicam and ASPEC, added some of their own ideas and created MP3, which was designed to achieve the same 
quality at 128 kbit/s as MP2 at 192 kbit/s.

All algorithms were approved in 1991, finalized in 1992 as part of MPEG-1, the first standard suite by
MPEG, which resulted in the international standard ISO/IEC 11172-3, published in 1993. Further work on 
MPEG audio was finalized in 1994 as part of the second suite of MPEG standards, MPEG-2, more formally 
known as international standard ISO/IEC 13818-3, originally published in 1995.

Compression efficiency of encoders is typically defined by the bit rate because compression rate depends 
on the bit depth and sampling rate of the input signal. Nevertheless, there are often published compression
 rates that use the CD parameters as references (44.1 kHz, 2 channels at 16 bits per channel or 2x16 bit).
 Sometimes the Digital Audio Tape (DAT) SP parameters are used (48 kHz, 2x16 bit). Compression ratios with
 this reference are higher, which demonstrates the problem of the term compression ratio for lossy encoders.

Karlheinz Brandenburg used a CD recording of Suzanne Vega's song "Tom's Diner" to assess the MP3 compression
 algorithm. This song was chosen because of its softness and simplicity, making it easier to hear 
imperfections in the compression format during playbacks. Some have taken to jokingly refer to Suzanne
 Vega as "The mother of MP3". Some more serious and critical audio excerpts (glockenspiel, triangle, 
accordion, ...) were taken from the EBU V3/SQAM reference compact disc and have been used by professional 
sound engineers to assess the subjective quality of the MPEG Audio formats.


[edit] Going public
A reference simulation software implementation, written in the C language and known as ISO 11172-5, was 
developed by the members of the ISO MPEG Audio committee in order to produce bit compliant MPEG Audio files
 (Layer 1, Layer 2, Layer 3). Working in non real time on a number of operating systems, it was able to 
demonstrate the first real time hardware decoding (DSP based) of compressed audio. Some other real time 
implementation of MPEG Audio encoders were available for the purpose of digital broadcasting (radio DAB, 
television DVB) towards consumer receivers and set top boxes.

Later, on July 7, 1994 the Fraunhofer Society released the first software MP3 encoder called l3enc. The 
filename extension .mp3 was chosen by the Fraunhofer team on July 14, 1995 (previously, the files had been 
named .bit). With the first real-time software MP3 player Winplay3 (released September 9, 1995) many 
people were able to encode and playback MP3 files on their PCs. Because of the relatively small hard drives
 back in that time (c.500 MB) the technology was essential to store non-instrument based (see: tracker 
and midi) music for listening pleasure on a computer.


[edit] MP2
In October 1993, MP2 (MPEG-1 Audio Layer 2) files appeared on the Internet and were often played back 
using the Xing MPEG Audio Player, and later in a program for Unix by Tobias Bading called MAPlay, which
 was initially released on February 22, 1994 (MAPlay was also ported to Microsoft Windows).

Initially the only encoder available for MP2 production was the Xing Encoder, accompanied by the program 
CDDA2WAV, a CD processor that transforms CD audio tracks to Waveform Audio Files.

The Internet Underground Music Archive (IUMA) is generally recognized as the start of the on-line music 
revolution. IUMA was the Internet's first high-fidelity music web site, hosting thousands of authorized
 MP2 recordings before MP3 or the web was popularized.


[edit] Internet
In the first half of 1995 through the late 1990s, MP3 files began flourishing on the Internet. MP3 popularity
 was mostly due to, and interchangeable with, the successes of companies and software packages like 
Nullsoft's Winamp (released in 1997), mpg123, and Napster (released in 1999). Those programs made it 
very easy for the average user to playback, create, share, and collect MP3s.

Controversies regarding peer-to-peer file sharing of MP3 files have spread widely in recent years ? 
largely because high compression enables sharing of files that would otherwise be too large and cumbersome
 to easily share. Some major record companies reacted by filing a lawsuit against Napster, due to the 
vastly increased spread of MP3s through the Internet, to protect their copyrights (see also intellectual
 property).

Commercial online music distribution services (like the iTunes Music Store) usually prefer other/proprietary
 music file formats that support Digital Rights Management (DRM) to control and restrict the use of 
digital music. The use of formats that support DRM is in an attempt to prevent copyright infringement 
of copyright protected materials, but methods exist to defeat most protection schemes, although such 
methods are considered illegal in many countries.


[edit] Encoding audio
The MPEG-1 standard does not include a precise specification for an MP3 encoder. The decoding algorithm and
 file format, as a contrast, are well defined. Implementers of the standard were supposed to devise thei
 own algorithms suitable for removing parts of the information in the raw audio (or rather its MDCT 
representation in the frequency domain). During encoding 576 time domain samples are taken and are 
transformed to 576 frequency domain samples. If there is a transient 192 samples are taken instead of 
576. This is done to limit the temporal spread of quantization noise accompanying the transient.

This is the domain of psychoacoustics: the study of subjective human perception of sounds.

As a result, there are many different MP3 encoders available, each producing files of differing quality.
 Comparisons are widely available, so it is easy for a prospective user of an encoder to research the best 
choice. It must be kept in mind that an encoder that is proficient at encoding at higher bitrates (such as 
LAME, which is in widespread use for encoding at higher bitrates) is not necessarily as good at other, 
lower bitrates.


[edit] Decoding audio
Decoding, on the other hand, is carefully defined in the standard. Most decoders are "bitstream compliant",
 meaning that the decompressed output they produce from a given MP3 file will be the same (within a specified 
degree of rounding tolerance) as the output specified mathematically in the ISO/IEC standard document. 
The MP3 file has a standard format which is a frame consisting of 384, 576, or 1152 samples (depends on MPEG 
version and layer) and all the frames have associated header information (32 bits) and side information 
(9, 17, or 32 bytes, depending on MPEG version and stereo/mono). The header and side information help the 
decoder to decode the associated Huffman encoded data correctly.

Therefore, for the most part, comparison of decoders is almost exclusively based on how computationally 
efficient they are (i.e., how much memory or CPU time they use in the decoding process).


[edit] Bit rate
The bit rate is variable for MP3 files. The general rule is that more information is included from the 
original sound file when a higher bit rate is used, and thus the higher the quality during playback. In
 the early days of MP3 encoding, a fixed bit rate was used for the entire file.

Bit rates available in MPEG-1 Layer 3 are 32, 40, 48, 56, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128, 160, 192, 224, 256 and 
320 kbit/s, and the available sampling frequencies are 32, 44.1 and 48 kHz. 44.1 kHz is almost always 
used (coincides with the sampling rate of compact discs), and 128 kbit/s has become the de facto "good 
enough" standard, although 192 kbit/s is becoming increasingly popular over peer-to-peer file sharing 
networks. MPEG-2 and the (unofficial) MPEG-2.5 include some additional bit rates: 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48,
 56, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128, 144, 160 kbit/s; while providing lower sampling frequencies (8, 11.025, 12, 
16, 22.05 and 24 kHz).

Variable bit rates (VBR) are also possible. Audio in MP3 files is divided into frames, each of which has 
its own bitrate, so it is possible to change the bit rate dynamically as the file is encoded. This technique
 makes it possible to use more bits for parts of the sound with higher dynamics (more sound movement) and
 fewer bits for parts with lower dynamics, further increasing quality and decreasing storage space. For 
example, a portion composed of pure tones could be encoded at 48 kbit/s, taking up less space without any 
noticeable difference, while a portion played by a full symphony orchestra is encoded at 224 kbit/s to 
express it with greater fidelity. Although not originally implemented, many encoders now use this technique 
to greater or lesser extent.

Non-standard bitrates up to 640 kbit/s can be achieved with the LAME encoder and the --freeformat option,
 but few MP3 players can play those files. Gabriel Bouvigne, a principal developer of the LAME project, 
offered the following information about freeformat streams: [1]

"freeformat IS COMPLIANT with the mp3 standard. Decoders are required to be able to decode it up to 320kbps
, but decoding higher bitrate freeformat streams is not mandatory.

Practically, it means that higher than 320kbps, only a few decoders support it."


[edit] Audio quality
Because MP3 is a lossy format, it is able to provide a number of different options for its "bit rate" ? 
that is, the number of bits of encoded data that are used to represent each second of audio. Typically,
 rates chosen are between 128 and 320 kilobit per second. By contrast, uncompressed audio as stored on 
a compact disc has a bit rate of 1411.2 kbit/s (16 bits/sample ¡¿ 44100 samples/second ¡¿ 2 channels).

MP3 files encoded with a lower bit rate will generally play back at a lower quality. With too low a bit 
rate, "compression artifacts" (i.e., sounds that were not present in the original recording) may appear
 in the reproduction. A good demonstration of compression artifacts is provided by the sound of applause:
 it is hard to compress because of its randomness and sharp attacks. Therefore compression artifacts are 
audible as ringing or pre-echo.

As well as the bit rate of the encoded file, the quality of MP3 files depends on the quality of the encoder 
and the difficulty of the signal being encoded. As the MP3 standard allows quite a bit of freedom with
 encoding algorithms, different encoders may feature quite different quality, even when targeting similar 
bitrates. As an example, in a public collective test[2] (07/2003) featuring two different MP3 encoders at 
about 128kbps, one scored 3.66 on a 1-5 scale, while the other scored only 2.22.

Quality is heavily dependent on the choice of encoder and encoding parameters. While quality around 128kbps
 was somewhere between annoying and acceptable with older encoders, modern MP3 encoders can provide very 
good quality at those bitrates [3] (01/2006), not statistically different from quality provided by AAC, 
the technical successor of MP3. However, in 1998, MP3 at 128kbps was only providing quality equivalent 
to AAC-LC at 96kbps and MP2 at 192kbps [4].

The transparency threshold of MP3 can be estimated to be at about 128k with good encoders on typical music 
as evidenced by it's strong performance in the above test, however some particularly difficult material 
can require 192k or higher. As with all lossy formats, some samples can not be encoded perfectly transparent 
to all users. Thus many users opt for 192k as a good trade off.

At lower bitrates, the quality of MP3 quickly degrades, and is far behind AAC quality at 32kbps, as 
demonstrated by a collective listening test (06/2004)[5].

It is also important to note that perceived quality can be influenced by listening environment (ambient 
noise), listener attention, and listener train
