<Windows Mobile>

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Windows Mobile is a compact operating system combined with a suite of basic applications for mobile devices based on the Microsoft Win32 API. 
Devices which run Windows Mobile include Pocket PCs, Smartphones, and Portable Media Centers. It is designed to be somewhat similar to desktop 
versions of Windows.


Common Windows Mobile Features

Windows Mobile for Pocket PC carries these standard features in most of its versions:

- Today Screen shows the current date, owner information, upcoming appointments, e-mail messages, and tasks. 
It also includes the notification bar which includes icons to notify the status of Bluetooth and also includes the New button. 
Programs can be installed which adds extra items to the Today screen. One of these is Microsoft Money for Pocket PC. 
The background image can be customised directly through the Pocket PC, or themes can be created and syncronised onto the Pocket PC. 
- The taskbar shows the current time, the volume, and the connectivity status. When a program or message box is open the blank space after 
the clock is filled with an OK or close icon. The main feature of the taskbar is the Start Button, which is designed similarly to the 
Start Button which features on desktop versions of Windows. The Start Menu features recently opened programs at the top, nine 
customisable menu entries, and links to the program, settings, find (search), and help. 
- Pocket PC versions of Microsoft Office applications are included in Windows Mobile. These include Pocket Word and Pocket Excel. 
In Windows Mobile 5.0 Pocket PowerPoint has been included. These versions include many of the features which are used in desktop versions, 
but some other features like inserting tables and images have not been included in pre 5.0 versions. ActiveSync has capabilities which 
convert desktop versions of files to Pocket PC compatible versions. 
- Outlook mobile comes with Windows Mobile. This includes tasks, calendar, contacts, and inbox that can be sync'ed either with 
Outlook or direct with an Exchange Server or Kerio MailServer (internet connection is required for this method). Microsoft Outlook for 
desktop versions is sometimes included in a value-added CD-ROM which is included with the Pocket PC hardware manufacturer. 
- Windows Media Player for Windows Mobile is bundled with the Windows Mobile software. Currently, all Pocket PCs include Version 9 of the player, 
but Version 10 has been included with newer hardware and newer versions of Windows Mobile. For existing devices, Version 10 is available 
for download for only specified devices ? these include devices from the Dell Axim range. The player supports .WMA, .WMV, .MP3, and .AVI files. 
Currently MPEG files are not supported, and a third-party program must be downloaded to play these, and WAV files are played in a separate player. 
Some versions are also capable of playing .M4A audio. 
Client for PPTP VPNs. 



PocketPC 2002

PocketPC 2002 was powered by Windows CE 3.0. Targeted specifically at 240 ¡¿ 320 (QVGA) Pocket PC (keyboardless) devices, 
PocketPC 2002 was, like the original PocketPC 2000 release, a stand-alone entity in the Microsoft Embedded device range. 
With future releases, the Pocket PC and Smartphone lines would increasingly collide as the licensing terms were relaxed allowing OEMs to 
take advantage of more innovative, individual design ideas.




Windows Mobile 2003
 
Typical Windows Mobile 2003 for Pocket PC Today ScreenThe third version, named Windows Mobile 2003, was released on June 23, 2003, and 
was the first release under the Windows Mobile banner. It came in four editions: "Windows Mobile 2003 for Pocket PC Premium Edition", 
"Windows Mobile 2003 for Pocket PC Professional Edition", "Windows Mobile 2003 for Smartphone" and "Windows Mobile 2003 for Pocket PC Phone Edition". 
The last was designed especially for Pocket PCs which include phone functionalities (like HTC's Himalaya, distributed in many countries as Qtek, XDA, 
MDA or VPA). The Professional Edition was used in Pocket PC budget models such as the iPAQ rz1700 series. It lacked a number of features that 
were in the Premium Edition, such as a client for L2TP/IPsec VPNs.

Windows Mobile 2003 for Smartphone is ? despite several similarities with Pocket PC ? a substantially different platform that also requires 
software applications to be specifically targeting this device type. To name a few specifics, Windows Mobile powered Smartphone devices do not 
have touchscreens, have lower display resolution, have a regular phone keypad, and are specially designed for single-handed use.

Windows Mobile 2003 is powered by Windows CE 4.20.




Windows Mobile 2003 Second Edition

Windows Mobile 2003 Second Edition, also known as Windows Mobile 2003SE, was released on March 24, 2004 and first offered on the Dell Axim x30. 
It includes a number of improvements over its predecessor, such as:

The option to switch from landscape to portrait screen layout. This is not available in the Smartphone version. 
Pocket Internet Explorer (otherwise known as PIE) includes the option to force a page into a single-column layout, making reading easier 
since one now only has to scroll vertically. 
VGA (640¡¿480) screen resolution is now supported in addition to the previous 320¡¿240 resoution. Also supported is a new square 
form factor (240¡¿240 and 480¡¿480 for VGA screens), which is ideally suited for manufacturers wishing to include a hardware keyboard. 
Although it wasn't originally slated to contain this feature, Microsoft decided to add it due to pressure from Pocket PC manufacturers. 
Support for Wi-Fi Protected Access. 
Windows Mobile 2003SE is powered by Windows CE 4.21.111




Windows Mobile 5.0

Windows Mobile 5.0, originally codenamed "Magneto", was released on May 9, 2005. It is powered by Windows CE 5.0 and 
uses the .NET Compact Framework 1.0 SP2 ? an environment for programs based on .NET to be used.

Features include:

A new version of Office called "Office Mobile" 
PowerPoint Mobile has been added 
Excel Mobile adds graphing capability 
Word Mobile adds tables and graphics insertion 
Windows Media Player 10 Mobile 
Photo Caller ID 
Picture and Video package, which converges the management of videos and pictures 
Bluetooth support with fewer features than prior Broadcom/Widdcomm alternatives, although some users reportedly have managed to replace 
the defunct stack with the legacy Broadcom/Widdcomm stack.[citation needed] 
Global Positioning System (GPS) management interface to all navigation programs installed 
Microsoft Exchange Server "push" functionality improvements - Improvements only function with Exchange 2003 SP2 installed: 
http://www.microsoft.com/technet/prodtechnol/exchange/2003/sp2mobility.mspx. The "push" functionality also requires vendor/device support: 
http://www.palmblvd.com/articles/2005/10/2005-10-19-Microsoft-Looks-to.html, with the Palm Treo and Motorola Q scheduled to receive support 
with Q1 2006 firmware updates. With AKU2 software upgrades all WM 5.0 devices support DirectPush 
QWERTY keyboard-support is included by default 
Error reporting facility similar to that present in desktop and server Windows systems 
ActiveSync 4.2, promising 10?15% increased speed on synchronization 
Persistent storage (PS) is now supported in Pocket PCs allowing devices increase battery life. 
Previously up to 50% (enough for 72 hours of storage) of battery power was reserved just to maintain data in volatile RAM. 
Windows-based devices are moving from using RAM as their primary storage medium to the use of flash memory. 
Windows Mobile updates are released as Adaptation kit upgrade. AKU3 is the most current release, while the next version, Crossbow is planned. 
Windows Mobile 5.0 was released at Microsoft's Mobile and Embedded Developers Conference 2005 in Las Vegas, May 9?May 12, 2005.
