<Wearable computer>
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Wearable computers are computers that are worn on the body. They have been applied to areas such as behavioral modeling, health monitoring systems, 
information technologies and media development. Government organizations, military, and health professionals have all incorporated wearable computers 
into their daily operations. Wearable computers are especially useful for applications that require computational support while the user's hands, 
voice, eyes or attention are actively engaged with the physical environment.

 One of the main features of a wearable computer is consistency. There is a constant interaction between the computer and user, ie. 
there is no need to turn the device on or off. Another feature is the ability to multi-task. It is not necessary to stop what you are doing 
to use the device; it is augmented into all other actions. These devices can be incorporated by the user to act like a prosthetic. 
It can therefore be an extension of the user¡¯s mind and/or body.

Such devices look far different from the traditional cyborg image of wearable computers, but in fact these devices are becoming more powerful 
and more wearable all the time. The most extensive military program in the wearables arena is the US Army's Land Warrior system, 
which will eventually be merged into the Future Force Warrior system.




History

Depending on how broadly one defines both wearable and computer, the first wearable computer could be as early as the 1500s with the invention 
of the pocket watch or even the 1200s with the invention of eyeglasses. The first device that would fit the modern-day image of a wearable computer 
was constructed in 1961 by the mathematician Edward O. Thorp, better known as the inventor of the theory of card-counting for blackjack, 
and Claude E. Shannon, who is best known as "the father of information theory." The system was a concealed cigarette-pack sized analog computer 
designed to predict roulette wheels. A data-taker would use microswitches hidden in his shoes to indicate the speed of the roulette wheel, 
and the computer would indicate an octant to bet on by sending musical tones via radio to a miniature speaker hidden in a collaborators ear canal. 
The system was successfully tested in Las Vegas in June 1961, but hardware issues with the speaker wires prevented them from using it beyond their 
test runs. Their wearable was kept secret until it was first mentioned in Thorp's book Beat the Dealer (revised ed.) in 1966 and later published 
in detail in 1969. The 1970s saw rise to similar roulette-prediction wearable computers using next-generation technology, in particular a group 
known as Eudaemonic Enterprises that used a CMOS 6502 microprocessor with 5K RAM to create a shoe-computer with inductive radio communications 
between a data-taker and better (Bass 1985).

In 1967, Hubert Upton developed an analogue wearable computer that included an eyeglass-mounted display to aid lip reading. 
Using high and low-pass filters, the system would determine if a spoken phoneme was a fricative, stop consonant, voiced-fricative, 
voiced stop consonant, or simply voiced. An LED mounted on ordinary eyeglasses illuminated to indicate the phoneme type. The 1980s saw the rise 
of more general-purpose wearable computers. In 1981 Steve Mann designed and built a backpack-mounted 6502-based computer to control flash-bulbs, 
cameras and other photographic systems. Mann went on to be an early and active researcher in the wearables field, especially known for his 
1994 creation of the Wearable Wireless Webcam (Mann 1997). In 1989 Reflection Technology marketed the Private Eye head-mounted display, 
which scanned a vertical array of LEDs across the visual field using a vibrating mirror. 1993 also saw Columbia University's augmented-reality 
system known as KARMA: Knowledge-based Augmented Reality for Maintenance Assistance. Users would wear a Private Eye display over one eye, giving 
an overlay effect when the real world was viewed with both eyes open. KARMA would overlay wireframe schematics and maintenance instructions 
on top of whatever was being repaired. For example, graphical wireframes on top of a laser printer would explain how to change the paper tray. 
The system used sensors attached to objects in the physical world to determine their locations, and the entire system ran tethered from a 
desktop computer (Feiner 1993).




Commercial Viability

The commercialization of general-purpose wearable computers, as led by companies such as Xybernaut, CDI and ViA Inc, has thus far met with limited success. 
Publicly-traded Xybernaut tried forging alliances with companies such as IBM and Sony in order to make wearable computing widely available, 
but in 2005 their stock was delisted and the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection amid financial scandal and federal investigation. 
In 1998 Seiko marketed the Ruputer, a computer in a (fairly large) wristwatch, to mediocre returns. In 2001 IBM developed and publicly 
displayed two prototypes for a wristwatch computer running Linux, but the product never came to market. In 2002 Fossil, 
Inc. announced the Fossil Wrist PDA, which ran the Palm OS. Its release date was set for summer of 2003, but was delayed several times 
and was finally made available on January 5, 2005.

Evidence of the allure of the wearable computer and the weak market acceptance is evident with market leading Panasonic Computer Solutions 
Company's failed product in this market. Panasonic has specialized in mobile computing with their Toughbook line for over 10 years and has 
extensive market research into the field of portable, wearable computing products [1]. In 2002, Panasonic introduced a wearable brick computer 
coupled with a handheld or armworn touchscreen. The brick would communicate wirelessly to the screen, and concurrently the brick would 
communicate wirelessly out to the internet or other networks. The products were named the Toughbook 07 and the MDWD. According to a spokesmen 
at Panasonic US Distributer USAT Corp., the Toughbook 07 brick computer never gained market traction as it was hampered by a relatively 
slow ultra-low voltage processor. The wearable brick was quietly pulled from the market in 2005, while the screen evolved to a thin client 
touchscreen used with a handstrap. This product, the Toughbook 08 is larger and less likely to be worn on the body, and provides only for 
mechanical data entry (touchscreen, barcode, or card swipe). This thin-client approach does suggest a commercially viable solution to the 
combined problems of size, processing power and battery life for wearable computers.




Issues

Wearable computers have led to an increase in micro-management. That is, a society characterized by total surveillance and a greater influence of 
media and technologies. Surveillance has impacted more personal aspects of our daily lives and has been used to punish civilians for seemingly petty crimes. 
There is a concern that this increased used of cameras has affected more personal and private moments in our lives as a form of social control.








