<Personal digital assistant>
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

 (CDAs) are handheld devices that were originally designed as personal organizers, but became much more versatile over the years. 
PDAs have many uses: calculating, use as a clock and calendar, playing computer games, accessing the Internet, 
sending and receiving e-mail, use as a radio or stereo, video recording, recording notes, use as an address book, GPS and use as a spreadsheet. 
Newer PDAs also have both color screens and audio capabilities, enabling them to be used as mobile phones (smartphone), 
web browsers or portable media players. Many PDAs can access the Internet, intranets or extranets via Wi-Fi, or Wireless Wide-Area Networks (WWANs). 
One of the most significant PDA characteristic is the presence of a touch screen.



A typical PDA has a touch screen for data entry, a memory card slot for data storage and IrDA port for connectivity. 
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth are often integrated in newer PDA's.


Touch screen
Many original PDAs, such as the Palm Pilot, featured touch screens for user interaction, having only a few buttons usually reserved for 
shortcuts to often used programs. Touch screen PDAs, including Windows Pocket PC devices, usually have a detachable stylus that can be used on 
the touch screen. Interaction is then done by tapping the screen to activate buttons or menu choices, and dragging the stylus to, 
for example, highlight text.

Text input is usually done in one of two ways:
- Using a virtual keyboard, where a keyboard is shown on the touch screen. Input is done by tapping the letters. 
- Using letter or word recognition, where letters or words are written on the touch screen, and then "translated" to 
letters in the currently activated text field. Despite rigorous research and development projects, this data input method 
still requires much patience from the user since it tends to be rather inaccurate. 

PDAs for business use, including the BlackBerry and Treo, have a full keyboards and scroll wheels or thumb wheels to facilitate 
data entry and navigation, in addition to supporting touch-screen input. There are also full-size foldable keyboards available that 
plug directly into the PDA and allow for normal typing. BlackBerry also has additional functionality as push based email and applications


Memory Cards
Almost all PDA's have some form of memory card slot. A standard on modern PDA's is the SD (Secure Digital) slot. 
Although originally designed for memory, in recent years the invention of the SDIO standard has allowed such things as Wi-Fi cards 
and Webcam's to be used in the same slot. Compact Flash slots are used in many PDA's to provide extra expandability. 
For example, one slot is used for memory and the other for Wi-Fi. Some PDA's also have a USB port, mainly for USB flash drives.


Connectivity
All PDA's have an IrDA port for connectivity. This allows communication between two PDAs, a PDA and any device with an IrDA port, 
or between a PDA and a computer with an IrDA adapter. Most modern PDA's also have Bluetooth wireless connectivity, which is used by 
many mobile phones, headsets and GPS devices.


Synchronization
An important function of PDAs is synchronizing data with a PC. This allows up to date contact information stored on software such as 
Microsoft Outlook or ACT! to update the database on the PDA. The data synchronized ensures that the PDA has an accurate list of contacts, 
appointments and e-mail, allowing users to access the same information on the PDA as the host computer.

The synchronizing also prevents the loss of information stored on the device in case it is lost, stolen, or destroyed. 
Another advantage is that data input is usually a lot quicker on a PC, since text input via a touch screen is still not quite optimal. 
Transferring data to a PDA via the computer is therefore a lot quicker than having to manually input all data on the handheld device.

Most PDAs come with the ability to synchronize to a PC. This is done through synchronization software provided with the handheld, 
such as HotSync Manager, which comes with Palm OS handhelds, or Microsoft ActiveSync, which comes with Windows Mobile handhelds.

These programs allow the PDA to be synchronized with a Personal information manager. This personal information manager may be an outside 
program or a proprietary program. For example, the BlackBerry PDA comes with the Desktop Manager program which can synchronize to both 
Microsoft Outlook and ACT!. Other PDAs come only with their own proprietary software. For example, some early Palm OS PDAs came only 
with Palm Desktop while later Palms such as the Treo 650 has the built-in ability to sync to Palm Desktop and/or Microsoft Outlook. 
Third-party synchronization software is also available for many PDAs from companies like Intellisync and CompanionLink. 
This software synchronizes these handhelds to other personal information managers which are not supported by the PDA manufacturers, 
such as GoldMine and Lotus Notes.


Customization
As with personal computers, it is possible to install additional software on most PDAs. Software can be bought or downloaded from the Internet, 
allowing users to personalize their PDAs to their liking. Almost all PDAs also allow for adding some form of hardware. 
The most common is a memory card slot, which allows the users to get additional and exchangeable storage space on their handheld devices. 
There are also miniature keyboards that can be connected to some PDAs for quicker text input. PDAs with Bluetooth can also use Bluetooth 
devices like headsets, mouse and foldable keyboards with their PDAs.




