Software prepares users for PMP certification exam
Product News Network,  Dec 15, 2005  
PMP Certification Exam Simulator assesses user's adeptness in applying knowledge, skills, tools, and methods used in project management. With graphical user interface for navigation, it allows users to choose number of questions, topics, and difficulty level to create customized exam. Features include 1,150 questions spread over 5 mock exams of varying difficulty levels, quiz of 150 questions, adaptive testing, comprehensive reports, and revision notes.

********************

Whizlabs Software, a key solution provider in IT Certification Exam Preparation has included better features to the Project Management Professional (PMP) Certification Exam Simulator for professionals seeking proficiency in project management.

Offered by Project Management Institute (PMI), PMP Certification assesses the adeptness of a professional in applying the knowledge, skills, tools, and methods that are used in project management. Apart from helping an individual gain proficiency in handling projects, this certification also gives formal recognition to professional expertise and experience thus enhancing employment prospects. An individual who achieves this certification will gain the competence to manage projects more efficiently by using the best project management techniques and by applying most effective tools and techniques in the workplace.

Whizlabs PMP Exam Simulator now has Enhanced User-Friendly Graphical User Interface to help navigate smooth practice. Wider Range of Questions which Multiple Choice. Robust Adaptive Testing to help increase the level of practice. Enhanced Customization features to help tune the preparation against time, difficulty levels and other such parameters. Mentors all through the preparation to help resolve queries. Exhaustive Mock Exams to diagnose strengths & weaknesses. Comprehensive Reports to assess and gauge progress in each exam objective. Interactive Quiz to serve as a tool to increase speed and revision for reinforcing the concepts. Quick Revision Notes in a concise format to serve as reminders of important concepts. Tips N Tricks to avoid drawbacks while preparing and taking the exam.

The PMP Exam Simulator has an assortment of 1150 questions spread over 5 different mock exams of varying difficulty levels and a quiz of 150 questions. It has been authored by highly experienced and certified professionals, and includes 1 Diagnostic Exam, 3 Practice Exams, and 1 Final Exam. The content and the questions are based on the latest pattern of the actual exam and provide the best-simulated environment. The users also have the option to choose the number of questions, topics, and difficulty level of the questions to create their own customized exam. This enables them to focus the preparation on the specific areas as per their individual requirements.

All the Whizlabs products come with free Technical Mentoring throughout an aspirant's preparation and an Unconditional Test PASS Guarantee -a mark of confidence that Whizlabs places in all its products.

Learn more about Whizlabs PMP Exam Simulator - http://www.whizlabs.com/pmp/pmp-certification-details.html

About Whizlabs

Whizlabs (http://www.whizlabs.com) an ISO 9001:2000 certified company, is a leading provider of IT skill assessment and certification exam preparation tools. Whizlabs' suite of offerings include "IT Certification Exam simulators and Instructor-led, Online Trainings" for various exams by Sun, IBM, Oracle, Microsoft, PMI, BEA, Cisco, and other leading IT vendors. Whizlabs also offers "IT Skill Assessment Solutions" for Corporations, Training Institutes, and Universities.

A four and a half year old company, Whizlabs has helped thousands of software professionals across the globe in realizing their dream of acquiring IT Certifications of their interest.

Whizlabs offerings have fuelled the career growth of IT professionals working in 321 Fortune 500 companies spread in 118 countries across the globe.

Learn more about the Whizlabs PMP Exam Simulator.

