Asus is starting off Computex 2018 on a high-spec note with the announcement of its ROG Phone. 
Bearing the Republic of Gamers branding and an unmistakably gamer-oriented design, the ROG Phone is Asus’ 
answer to the Razer Phone. This is the second phone after Razer’s to offer a 90Hz display — meaning its 
screen refreshes 90 times per second, delivering smoother animations — and Asus throws in the added bit 
of gamer pride by powering each ROG Phone with a specially selected 2.96GHz Qualcomm Snapdragon 845 chip. 
Yes, these will definitely be the fastest Snapdragons around.

I got to see engineering samples of the ROG Phone for myself here at Computex, and I walked away 
feeling more impressed by the actual hardware than I expected, though the premise of an Android smartphone 
for hardcore gamers still feels like it’s off the mark. Android doesn’t have any games demanding enough 
to tax the regular Snapdragon 845, never mind an overclocked variant with vapor cooling and a special 
attachable fan accessory, which is what the ROG Phone offers. What I see in this device is a bizarre 
transplantation of the traditional PC gamer’s aesthetic and performance priorities into the mobile realm. 
Even as I question who this device might be for, I am also deeply intrigued by its design, customizations, 
and deluge of gaming-centric attachments.

You’ll find the full set of ROG Phone specs in the sidebar, and they’re predictably maxed out. 
Nobody has offered a phone with more than 8GB of RAM, no one has a faster Snapdragon inside their phone, 
and other than the Porsche Design variant of the Huawei P20 Pro, I know of no other phone with a 512GB storage option.
Asus ticks the “best-specced Android phone ever” box.

To activate the maximum performance of its speed-binned chips, Asus lets you switch into “X Mode” by squeezing 
the sides of the phone. The squeeze works exactly as it does in HTC’s Edge Sense system, with a red glow showing 
up at the sides where you apply pressure. Once you give it a strong squeeze, the phone’s entire UI skin transforms 
from a cool blue to a deep and ominous red. X Mode is more than mere cosmetics, though, as it automatically optimizes 
performance for gaming by shutting down background processes and prioritizing whatever you’re playing for both RAM 
allocation and data transfer precedence. X Mode also controls the AeroActive Cooler, which is what Asus calls the 
additional fan accessory it offers for this phone.

Asus goes an extra step with its phone-edge interactions by giving players two so-called AirTriggers, 
residing in the spots of the usual shoulder buttons on game controllers. These are user-programmable 
and should help keep the screen clear of controls while gaming.