<Ultra-Mobile PC>
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

The Ultra-Mobile PC (abbreviated UMPC), previously known by its codename Project Origami, is a specification for a small form factor tablet PC. 
It was developed as a joint development exercise between Microsoft, Intel, and Samsung, among others. Current UMPCs feature the Windows XP 
Tablet PC Edition 2005 operating system and low-voltage Intel Pentium or VIA C7-M processors in the 1 GHz range.



Features
 
DialKeysUltra-Mobile PCs have a 20 cm (7-inch) or smaller touch sensitive screen at a minimum resolution of 800 ¡¿ 480. 
Windows XP Tablet PC Edition is used with slight tweaks to the interface to make it more suited for the small form factor. 
In addition, a software suite known as the Touch Pack Interface is included to make the interface more suitable for use of stylus as well as hand.

The Ultra-Mobile PC is just a platform for which manufacturers can design any model they want, provided they meet or exceed the baseline 
specifications laid down by Intel and Microsoft. However, the UMPC will be capable of running a full version of most PC operating systems. 
When the UMPC was disclosed at CeBIT 2006, Samsung, ASUS and Founder had near-complete devices on display. The Samsung Q1 officially 
launched on March 1, 2006

UMPCs will be able to run any software that has been written for the Windows XP platform, though the small form factor will mandate some 
changes to the interface. The standard Windows XP interface is the default, though a choice of having an interface more suited for the small 
form factor is available with the Touch Pack Interface. Due to the small size, most UMPC do not feature a physical keyboard, 
but a virtual keyboard, known as DialKeys, is provided in the Touch Pack Interface. Also, since the device has standard USB 2.0 connectivity, 
external keyboards and mice can be attached.

UMPC devices will include a 900 MHz Intel Celeron M, Pentium M or VIA C7-M processor, 256 MB to 1 GB of RAM, and a 30 to 160 GB harddisk, 
depending on the manufacturer. Other ultra mobile devices have been found with AMD Geode CPUs (Raon Digital Vega) or 
Transmeta Crusoe CPUs (OQO Model 01). Ultra-Mobile PCs can also feature GPS devices, webcams, fingerprint readers, stereo speakers, TV tuners, 
or memory card readers. Bluetooth, Wi-Fi and Ethernet are all supported as well.

UMPCs have enough processing power to support audio, video, and gaming, in addition to having rich support for browsing the internet as well as 
for other communication and networking applications. Windows Media Player will be included, with a special skin designed to provide a better 
experience on the small screen. The devices will also feature DirectX 8?class graphics, and all applications available for standard Tablet PCs 
are expected to be compatible.

In the future, the prices of UMPCs are expected to come down to the US$500 range. Battery life is expected to increase from the initial two 
and a half hours to eight hours. Finally, UMPCs will be upgraded to include Windows Vista early in 2007.




Available Devices

The list of UMPCs on the market is growing beyond the first available UMPCs: Amtek's T700 and Samsung's Q1. The Amtek unit is being sold worldwide 
through different OEM's. In the US it's the TabletKiosk eo v7110 and agopc ago7, in Europe the PaceBlade EasyBook P7 and it's Label Origami, 
in Australia the TabletKiosk eo V7110 and the Pioneer DreamBook UMPC 700, and in Japan the PBJ SmartCaddie.

TabletKiosk launched a line of Intel based UMPCs in late August 2006, the eo i7210 and i7209 can be found on the TabletKiosk Website, 
Tegatech Australia Website, & Pocket PC Solutions - UK.

While the OQO model 01 was actually launched well before the Ultra-Mobile PC craze began, it should be included in any discussion of the UMPC. 
It runs a Transmeta Crusoe processor at 1GHz, has 256MB of RAM and has a 20GB hard drive. It's tiny size and stylish exterior drew a lot 
of attention, but the $1900 pricetag kept it out of the hands of most consumers.


Latest Devices

In September 2006, Raon Digital launchd the Vega running a AMD Geode LX800, 256MB of RAM, and a 30GB hard drive. 
It's 4.3" screen and 500MHz processor give it a battery life of 5.5 hours. The Vega runs Microsoft Windows XP Home Edition and retails 
for 680,000 Korean won (U$700-750).

In early October 2006 Samsung quietly launched the Q1b, bringing the Ultra Mobile platform closer to the vision that Microsoft created. 
The Q1b features a VIA C7-M ULV processor running at 1GHz, a 30% brighter screen, up to 5 hours of battery life, and a lower price point 
than the Samsung Q1. The Q1b also has optional modules for HSDPA or WiBro for ubiquitous internet connectivity in major cities around the world. 
Both the Samsung Q1 & Samsung Q1b are now available at all North America Best Buy stores, Fry's Electronics, and CompUSA stores for 
US$1099 & US$899 respectively.




Upcoming Devices

There are quite a few announced UMPCs that haven't hit the market yet. The DualCor cPC, Mobits X17 and ASUSTek R2H have all been announced 
and are scheduled to be on the market sometime this year. Makers of the CPUs found in most Ultra-Mobile PCs, VIA & Intel, 
are stepping up efforts to create new processors and chipsets that could result in devices with 10 times lower power consumption than today¡¯s 
laptops in 2008.








