How to use a Digital Camera


Recording
With most digital cameras, taking pictures is the same as with a standard camera: just point the
camera and push the shutter button. Most digital cameras have viewfinders but some digital cameras 
have LCD screens. LCD screens let you see the image before you shoot and allow you to delete pictures
 you don¡¯t want, saving you time, effort, and camera memory. Unlike standard cameras, instead of 
storing pictures on film, digital cameras use a form of computer memory. Digital camera memory limits 
vary and may be supplemented with memory cards or specialty storage disks. Adding a memory card usually 
costs less than $100.

All cameras have some kind of delete feature, which may allow you to delete selected images, or may 
require that the entire memory must be deleted. Some cameras allow images from the computer screen to 
saved as digital photos for use in print or video applications.

Viewing
Some digital cameras allow you to actually view the pictures taken with built in LCD screens, without
 having to connect to an outside viewing medium. Digital cameras usually connect and download to a 
computer running a camera/imaging program. Some cameras require a computer card installed into the 
computer, other cameras use the computer¡¯s USB, serial or parallel ports, some cameras download through 
infrared, and some connect directly into a computer slot. New cameras store directly on floppy disks or
 cards that use floppy disk adapters.

Certain digital cameras have video output that allow the camera to send out an NTSC or PAL video 
signal directly through a standard RGB cable to a television, projector or VCR.

Saving
All digital cameras save pictures in a digital file format, which may be camera specific or 
standardized, such as PNG, GIF, or JPEG. The format that pictures are saved in will determine the 
amount of disk space needed to save a picture. Picture files can be converted using a graphics
program.

If the camera has the ability to output a video signal, video tape can be used to show or archive your 
pictures. 

Using your computer, you can print out your images. We suggest that you use either a laser or inkjet 
printer. New print cartridges, glossy paper, and iron on transfers are available for printing photos 
with inkjet printers. 

Applications
Once you have your images in your computer, they can be e-mailed as attachments. 
You can send your image from your fax/modem to any fax machine. 
Your images can be incorporated into print media, such as posters, signs, reports, banners, certificates,
 and any other publishable print document. 
Iron on transfers allow images to be printed on items such as T-shirts, aprons, banners, flags, etc. 
Depending on the camera, images can be put directly onto video for presentation without a computer. 
Images can be added to word-processing documents and presentations. 
Images can also be included on homepages for the World Wide Web. Images should be converted into PNG, 
GIF or JPEG format for the World Wide Web. 
Accessory Equipment
Almost any printer can print images, but for the best quality, use a high resolution ink jet or laser
 printer. Currently there are printers and/or printing accessories specifically designed for printing 
pictures. To print high quality "photo style" images you should use a printer that can take a photo 
quality ink cartridge and print onto glossy or semi-gloss paper.

Most cameras include their own cables to connect to either a PC or Mac computer, and some cameras include
 the cables for direct video output. It is possible that you will need to purchase cables, but it is 
also possible to build your own, with a little work.

Most cameras include image handling software. Depending on the software, capabilities may be as simple 
as view and save or may have numerous picture editing capabilities. Pictures can always be used with 
the popular graphics and imaging software programs, such as PhotoShop or Corel Graphics.

Images are often large files and saving them can take up a lot of your disk space. It is possible to 
save the images in compressed formats like JPEG or GIF, and save disk room. If you plan to save lots 
of images, an external drive like a ZIP drive or a CD ROM burner is recommended. 
