Best Cell Phone Memory Cards
If there is one thing that the latest cell phones lack, it is a bigger cell phone memory capacity. Yes, most high-end cell phones are with 32 GB worth of memory. Now, you can easily upgrade to higher memory capacity with memory cards for your cell phones.

Now, for a 1GB memory card, you may spend around $40.00 for it. These tiny format removable memory cards predicted to sell about 1.1 billion pieces by this year alone (2010). So do you want to know the best memory cards out in the market today? If you answered yes, then this article is for you.

If you want the best memory cards, then I suggest that you read on.

Samsung electronics is probably the best of all cell phone memory cards maker. At about .04 inches thick, it is capable of storing as much as 12 hours worth of video. Not to mention that it is also fast. It has a read and writes speed of about 10/7 megabits/second. It means that you are allowed to download worth of three hours of video in less than 2 minutes. It is also made to be compatible with all types of cell phones that use memory cards.

If you want to record or watch a video, or store songs in your cell phone, then you must get a bigger memory card for your cell phone.

These are some of the Formats and Brand choices:

Sony, Kingston and Intel make memory cards and memory sticks. They are the oldest type and bigger type of data storage devices.
Samsung uses Multimedia Card or MMC.
ScanDisk just recently announced that they are having a 1 GB MicroSD card (Micro Secure Digital Card).
All of the brands and types mentioned above do the same thing. However, the MicroSD is now becoming the format of choice for most mobile users. Its design and capabilities are more popular than the MMCmicro (Multimedia) and even Sony¡¯s latest micro sized format, which is called the M2.

Added to that, SD memory cards are use in lots of digital products other than cell phones. They are, music players, digital cameras, handheld PCs and other devices that use SD or Secure Digital slot.
