Mobile technology evolves constantly. This year has already introduced us to quad-core processors in smartphones. Faster data rates via 4G cellular connections are also already available. That gives us blazingly fast processors and incredible speeds for streaming data - but what's next? Faster processors and connection speeds are great, but they are merely stepping stones to more advanced technologies.
Many improvements are going to come in the form of data presentation and interactive experiences on-screen. Thus far, no processor has been capable of providing the resources needed for a true 3-D screen on a mobile phone. However, such products are in the development pipeline. Some analysts predict that 80 percent of new smartphones will have 3-D screens by 2015.
Do you ever get frustrated by the lack of true tactile feedback when typing on your touchscreen? Many people use phones with slide-out style keyboards simply because they can't get past the need to feel the keys under their fingertips. However, smartphones are about to get the best of both worlds. Touch screens with the ability to have buttons temporarily rise from the flat surface during use, and then recede when typing is finished, have already been developed and are being prepared for production.
For gamers, faster processors will mean an entirely new world of games. Combining these multi-core processors with fast data rates, online gaming via mobile devices is about to explode. Many industry experts are predicting that tablets and phones will replace consoles as the kings of gaming in the near future. Some major game developers are even switching to mobile-only technologies for their latest games. One of the few problems left to overcome for truly great mobile entertainment is extended battery life - another technology that is constantly improving.
When the time comes for all these features to be implemented, it will likely take a while for prices to come down. How are users to afford the price-hikes, especially when they already paid good money for smartphones from previous generations?
One easy answer is for customers to sell used cellphones online. Secure Trade-In provides those who wish to upgrade their mobile devices an easy avenue for selling a used cellphone. Customers can offload their old phones, as well as iPads, and receive money to upgrade to the latest and greatest technologies. Secure Trade-In provides a safe, secure, easy, environmentally friendly way for customers to move on to the next generation of phones.