iPhone & iPad Basic Technology

Apple is an American based international corporation know for it’s innovative communication based designs that range from various consumer electronics including phones, computer software, personal computers, and portable media devices. The Macintosh line of computers has been Apple’s most prosperous hardware designs, and have been followed up by other innovative products such as the iPhone, the iPad and various other technologies. The iPhone and iPad has played major roles in the advancement of next generation communication with creative technology.

iPhone Technology
The iPhone runs the Apple exclusive iOS mobile operating system, which was originally named iPhone OS. iPhone’s may serve as a video camera, which was not a primary feature until the the release of the iPhone 3GS. Like other smartphones, it’s widely used as a portable media player, a camera, and provides owners with portable web browsing. Other features include sending texts, receiving video voice mail, with select phone connections ranging from the lower end 2G and 3G data and Wi-Fi connections. The user interface is designed specifically for the phone’s multi-touch screen, and a virtual keyboard.

The technology advancements for the includes five generations of updates. Each model was released with five major iOS releases. The early iPhone design was GSM based, and provided many of the design precedents, that include the screen size, button placements, that have been consistent with all future models. With the release of the iPhone 3G, 3G cellular network capabilities were introduced, along with A-GPS location software. The iPhone 3GS introduced including video recording at 480p, a compass, higher resolution camera, and an updated processor.

The iPhone’s text can be enlarged to make them more accessible for users with impaired vision, and also accommodates those with impaired hearing with closed captioning and external teletype options. There is also screen reader software, zooming features, and mono audio for those with limited hearing in one ear. Apple continues to release product that makes the phone more accessible.

iPad Technology
The iPad has paved the way for quality media on the go, allowing users to enjoy media such as movies, books, web content, games, periodicals, music, and helpful applications. The distinctive size and weight fall between the smartphone and modern laptops. The iPad, like other Apple devices, uses the exclusive iOS.
The first two iPad generations touchscreens uses a 1,024 by 768 pixel display, a 7.75×5.82 inch liquid crystal display. The screens were designed to be scratch & fingerprint resistant. Apple switched from the 7-inch screen as it felt too small, then opted for the 10 inch screen, intended to present the software to users efficiently. Similar to the iPhone, the iPad was developed to be controlled with the users fingers, requiring users to purchase specific capacitive stylist to use as an extension. Unlike the iPhone’s applications, the iPad’s built-in applications support screen rotation in four orientations, and it doesn’t to have a native orientation, just the relative positions of the home buttons.

Overall, Apple’s iPhone and iPad are considered by many, top competitors in their respective areas and they aren’t looking to be replaced by other technology anytime soon.

Want to know more on the local internet providers? Go through more of Jason King’s articles which are rich in internet provider related information. He works for Internetbyzipcode.com.
