The Buzz around the New Mini iPad

Apple changed the way computers were perceived with the introduction of the iPad and the tablet PC. If you have had a blast playing games on your device or browsing page after page of a new book, then you are in for a real surprise, as Apple has now announced a new version of this tablet PC, known as the Mini iPad. However, unlike the other versions of this device, the new version has a slight twist to it.

It is likely that you want to learn almost everything about this iPad, from technical specs, to the look and its features. In addition, you’ll want to be up to speed on the compatible accessories like iPad covers, ear phones, dock and speakers. While there are no definite information about the exact look and contents of this device, it is estimated by industry experts that it may have the following additions and enhancements. Let’s take a look at these features.

Size, Shape and Look
The iPad Mini could measure 7.3 mm thick, 134.73mm wide and 200.13mm long, which makes it sleeker and smaller than the regular iPads. The design could be anywhere between the iPhone 4 box style to a MacBook unibody case, or even the rounded ones like the other iPads. The screen is expected to reach out on the side, as opposed to being contained in the frame of device. So, you might need a change over from the iPad 2 protective cases you may already own.

Connectivity and Battery Life
Just like the other iPads, this one too will have equipped with all the latest features like Wi-Fi and Bluetooth. It’s also quite likely to one up the New iPad, it may feature LTE. Battery drain is not typically an issue with Apple products, and amazingly, most Apple products get between seven to ten hours of battery life. Nothing is truly known about the iPad Mini’s battery, but just like New iPad, it may have a Retina Display. Thus, Apple will likely feature similar and maybe smaller version of the 42.5-watt-hour rechargeable lithium-polymer battery of the latest tablet.

Other Features
The iPad mini is expected to have the same dual-core A5X chip with quad-core graphics used to power the old one. It may even have smaller dock connectors from 30 pins to either 19 pins, or possibly 9 pins. So just like getting a new iPhone 4 protective case when changing your iPhone, you may need to do the same with the Mini iPad.

Kensington is an inventor and worldwide leader in laptop security locks, an acknowledged leader of Trackball innovation and offer the broadest range of premium branded iPad, Tablet and iPhone 5 accessories and productivity solutions.