Does Free Cell Phone Tracking Really Exist?
Today, a cell phone has attained omnipresent status. Very few of us can imagine or recall life without a cell phone in our hand. With advancements in technology, the cell phone has gone from being a device which was primarily used to make and receive calls to something that helps us conduct everyday life ? banking, shopping, navigating, research and using the internet.

Such capabilities also lead to an individual using the cell phone as a storage device for various kinds of information pertaining to his life. Tracking a cell phone becomes essential when one is talking about such devices being given to children, employees and even for one¡¯s own protection.

There are many cell phone tracking resources in the market today that will help the individual or owner of the cell phone in keeping track of his or her cell phone. Plenty of companies offer free cell phone tracking too.

It is highly recommended that you conduct a thorough research on the software ? any software ? before downloading and using the same. While free cell phone tracking software may exist in the market today, they may also come teeming with phone viruses. So do take some time off to do a spot of research before opting for anything that is free.

Free cell phone tracking promises the following activities or capabilities:


Free recording of all SMS messages that come into and go out of the phone. With this feature, you can read all the messages that have been exchanged via the cell phone.
Surveillance camera ? the mobile phone can be converted into a real time surveillance camera with the software. Once the software is up and running on the phone, the camera can be turned on with an SMS command.
Listening in to calls ? cell phone tracking software enables a person to listen in on conversations and calls that are occurring on the cell phone. There is also a call log that is generated and can be emailed to your account.
Silent or stealth mode ? with the software, the device will not show any visible signs of the installation and will respond to SMS commands in completely stealth mode. For instance, if you send an SMS to the phone with the command for switching on the camera, then the SMS will be received in completely silent mode. There will be no lights lighting up the cell phone or a ¡°ping¡± of any kind for message received alerts.
Tracing the phone¡¯s location ? the GPS location of the phone can come in great use when you are wondering where your lost or misplaced device might be. This cell phone tracking software works either with GPS tracking or with the help of cell phone towers and gives you a location of your cell phone.
Online tracking ? with the cell phone tracking software, you do not need 24/7 access to the device to track its activities. These activities can be monitored through the use of an online control panel. You simply have to create an account and then you can have free access to all the activities of the phone.