Facts about Android’s Ice Cream Sandwich

Android, as we all know, is an extremely well-known mobile phone operating system that is in vogue in recent times. To date Android has successfully come up with various versions of the same. However, a new Android 4.0 version was introduced in the market some months back. This particular version is popularly known as Android’s Ice Cream Sandwich. Most importantly, the 4.0 Android version (Ice Cream Sandwich) is known for the exclusive and out of the box features that it is known to possess.

Here are some facts and features of Ice Cream Sandwich.

Lock Screen And Active Notification Feature
Android’s Ice Cream Sandwich comes complete with a lock screen that tends to somewhat resemble the one that is noticed on Honeycomb tablets. One important development in Android’s Ice Cream Sandwich is with respect to the notification tray. In the case of this particular version of Android, the notification tray displays all the recent activities in the most organized manner thus allowing you to jump on a text message or e-mail that you would like to check on a priority basis. Apart from this, at the bottom of the screen of Android’s Ice Cream Sandwich you will be able to scroll through all the active applications. This will help you to quickly glance through the apps that are running, which would eventually assist you to shutdown the apps that you would no longer be requiring.

Face Recognition System
In addition, one major milestone covered by Android’s Ice Cream Sandwich is the face recognition system that lets you use your face in order to unlock your phone. This is a very up-to-the-minute characteristic that has been able to win a good number of votes.

Talk To Me Tool
Yet another feature of Android’s Ice Cream Sandwich is the talk to me tool. This tool has made texting way too easier for all the users. The Android keyboard has also witnessed a fair amount of upgrade. In the previous versions of Android you were required to manually press the voice command key, but now all that you need to do is talk to your phone and dictate your commands. Similarly, the task of copying and pasting has become quite stable all throughout the operating system.

Multi-Tasking Button
Above all, Android’s Ice Cream Sandwich comes complete with a multi-tasking button that helps you to browse and switch between a number of applications.

Miscellaneous Features
For all you people who wish to get a clear idea of your day’s agenda or desire to go through the complete month at a time can now easily operate the calendar icon that is in-built in Android’s Ice Cream Sandwich.

Secondly, Android’s Ice Cream Sandwich comes with a camera that can assist you to sort out the shots on the basis of location or even people for that matter. Similarly, you can even share pictures with ease in the camera. If a one of its kind smartphone or tablet experience is what you are looking out for, then in that case Android’s Ice Cream Sandwich is a must-have for you. The above mentioned facts about Android’s Ice Cream Sandwich are definite to come across as a pleasant surprise to all users.

This post is written by Tarun Jaitely, He is a tech blogger and a freelance writer. He generally writes topics related to Android Firmwares, Android Rooting, Latest Android Updates.