Getting A Taste of Google’s Unveiling of New Devices

Google proved this week that although one Hurricane Sandy might put a halt on a big planned press event, it wasn’t enough to stop them from revealing the much-anticipated new Nexus gadgets. All of the new products were quite a bit to take in, and one might have found it necessary to stop and keep track of just who was carrying what, but all of the new pieces are looking quite promising.

The basic rundown of the next line of Nexus products include the LG Nexus 4 smartphone, the Asus Nexus 7 tablets, as well as the Nexus 10 Samsung tablet. Based on the companies involved with the production of these gadgets, Google was looking to team with as many as possible to create a bigger portfolio. But aside from the business tactics, it’s important to look at what each of these devices are bringing to the market for Nexus-hungry users.

Nexus 10 Tablet from Samsung
Between all of the devices that Google had announced this week, the Nexus 10 tablet from Samsung is probably the one that excites me the most. This is coming in pretty packed with all types of specs that could easily rival that of the Apple iPad – even more easily, the iPad Mini. It’s great to see Samsung still fighting the good fight against Apple, and the Nexus 10 is certainly a great way to go about it.

The Nexus 10 comes in at a 10.05-inch screen with a pixel resolution at 2560×1600. The display will be Retina, making for one impressive screen to anyone. According to Information Week, other specifications include a RAM numbering at 2 GB, dual-core A15 processor, a 5-megapixel camera/1.9 megapixel user camera, as well as a Mali T604 graphics processor. The only falter that one will have to face is that there is no 3 or 4G capability. Users will have a choice between a 16GB and 32GB Nexus 10, priced at $399 and $499, respectively.

Nexus 7 Tablet from Asus
The Nexus 7 is the more financially conservative tablet in comparison to the Nexus 10. At $199 for a 16GB and $249 for a 32GB, things are certainly scaled back with this one. What the Nexus 7 does have over the Nexus 10 is a 3G option for the 32GB, but this will run customers an extra $50.

As compared to the former Nexus 7, you shouldn’t really expect to find much of anything new. 1 GB RAM, a 7-inch display clocking in with a 1280X800 resolution, and a quad-core Nvidia Tegra 3 processor (seems to be the standardized processor for many tablets these days).

Like I said, the most significant attribute of the Nexus 7 is the 3G capability (if you upgrade), which the Nexus 10 doesn’t even offer as an option at all. Otherwise, you’re getting a pretty standardized tablet here.

Nexus 4 Smartphone from LG
I’m actually looking pretty forward to seeing what this phone will actually be able to do. According to ABC News, this new LG phone is going to serve as the replacement for the Samsung Galaxy Nexus phone from last year. This obviously does not serve as any indication of Google and Samsung’s relationship being that they are still teamed up for the Nexus 10.

This phone is coming in with a 4.7-inch screen, with a quad core S4 Pro processor. There will be two options (similar to that of the other devices) of space, with the 8GB running at $299, and the 16GB going for $349. What is pretty limited is the service carrier, which right now only has T-Mobile on board, with no one else to join. This really stifles the potential market share of the Nexus 4, and lack of sales may mean a call for further negotiation with other cellular service carriers.

This serves as a basic rundown of the new Google devices, and you are encouraged to conduct further research yourself.

Author Bio – Ezra Melino is the primary writer of the tech news blog DX3, and enjoys sharing articles on other sites as well.