N Screen and Multi-Device Services: Focusing on the Strategies of Device Makers, Telecom Carriers, and Internet Service Providers

N Screen and Multi-Device Business Trends in the Japanese Market 
ELECTRONICS.CA PUBLICATIONS, the electronics industry market research and knowledge network, announces the availability of a new report entitled 
"N Screen and Multi-Device Business Trends in the Japanese Market". N Screen Services and Multi-Device Services are often used in the same meaning.
 Technically speaking, however, Multi-Device Service is a broader concept that encompasses N Screen Service. Multi-Device Service is, literally, to 
provide the same content or services on a variety of devices. Along with the evolution of the ICT environment, Multi-Device Services have been evolving as well.

To begin with, thanks to the extension of internet-enabled devices, online content and online service channels have expanded. On top of this, more recently, the 
environment where consumers use multiple devices according to time and place is being created. In this situation, multi-device platforms are gaining attention for
 enabling users to enjoy the same content or services seamlessly, irrespective of which device / medium is used.

The former focuses on the extension of distribution channels from the supplier¡¯s point of view with ¡°One Source, Multi Channel¡± in mind, whereas the latter does 
on the diversification of offers and the continuity of services for the benefit of consumers, which can be aptly described as ¡°One User, Multi Device¡±. N Screen 
which is recently getting attention is part of the latter. It falls into the broader concept of Multi-Device Services. N Screen is about enabling the user to use multiple
 devices, which means, it should be made up of integrated platforms for multi-devices.

This report analyzes the current situation and strategy of device makers, telecom carriers, Internet service providers regarding N Screen and Multi-Device businesses.

 The scope of the report is as follows:
 - The report is confined to entertainment content, personal storage, and advertising business strategy. Commerce & Smart Work Solution are clearly different from 
   others in terms of the way the value chain is formed, therefore it is considered necessary to exclude them from this report and analyze them separately.
 - The report covers an analysis of businesses concerning new-concept media players, smartphones, smart tablets, smart TVs and e-book readers.
 - The report also includes services that meet the two requirements stated above but are not in line with the concept of N Screen (building an integrated platform 
   for various devices to enable seamless viewings of the same content on multiple devices). It is because smartphones, smart tablets, smart TVs, and new-concept 
   media players embedded with the common OS and platform are viewed from the mid-to-long term perspective as part of strategies to connect devices in pursuit
   of N Screen business.

