The Benefits of Multiple CPU Cores in Mobile Devices 

 Mobile devices perform a wide variety of tasks such as Web browsing, video playback, mobile gaming, SMS text messaging, and location-based services. Due to the growth in the availability of high speed mobile and Wi-Fi networks, mobile devices will also be used for various performance-intensive tasks that were previously handled by traditional PCs. The next generation of smartphones (called ¡°Super phones¡±) and tablets will be used for a wide variety of tasks such as playback of high definition 1080p videos, Adobe¢ç Flash¢ç-based online gaming, Flash-based streaming high definition videos, visually rich gaming, video editing, simultaneous HD video downloads, encode and uploads, and real-time HD video conferencing.  The current generation of mobile processors is not designed to deal with this tidal wave of high performance use cases. The quality of experience on devices based on single core CPUs rapidly degrades when users run several applications concurrently, or run performanceintensive applications such as games, video conferencing, video editing, and more. In order to improve CPU performance, engineers employ several techniques, such as using faster and smaller semiconductor processes, increasing core operating frequency and voltage, using larger cores, and using larger on-die caches. Increasing the size of the CPU core or cache delivers performance increases only up to a certain level, beyond which thermal and heat dissipation issues make any further increase in core and cache size impractical. From basic semiconductor physics we know that increasing operating frequency and voltage can exponentially increase power consumption of semiconductor devices. Even though engineers may be able to squeeze out higher performance by increasing frequency and voltage, the performance increase would drastically reduce battery life. In addition, processors that consume higher power would require larger cooling solutions resulting in an undesired expansion in device size. Therefore, increasing the operating 4 frequency of the processor to meet the ever-increasing performance requirements of mobile 
applications is not a viable solution for the long run. To satisfy the rapidly growing demand for performance and form factor sleekness in mobile devices, the industry has begun to adopt newer technologies such as Symmetrical Multiprocessing and Heterogeneous Multi-core computing. NVIDIA Tegra is the world¡¯s most advanced mobile processor built from the ground up as a heterogeneous multi-core SoC (System-On-a-Chip) architecture with two ARM Cortex A9 CPU cores and several other purpose-built cores to handle specialized tasks such as audio, video, and graphics. Purposebuilt cores require fewer transistors, operate at lower frequencies, deliver higher performance, 
and consume much lower power than general purpose processing cores for tasks such as audio, video, and graphics processing.  

For several decades PC processors were primarily single core architectures and CPU makers increased performance by increasing operating frequencies, core sizes, and using smaller manufacturing processes allowing more transistors in the same chip area. However, PC 
manufacturers realized that the continual increase in frequency and core sizes caused exponential increases in power consumption and excessive heat dissipation. Therefore, CPU makers developed multi-core CPU architectures to continue delivering higher performance 
processors, while limiting the power consumption of these processors. Most desktop and notebook systems today use either a dual or quad core processor and consume significantly lower power than their single core predecessors. But mobile devices like smartphones and 
tablets benefit even more from multi-core architectures because the battery life benefits are so substantial. Dual-core processors will be the standard in 2011, and quad-core is coming in the near future. 
Mobile application processors are facing the same performance and power challenges that the desktop and notebook CPUs faced a few years ago. Demanding mobile applications such as HD video playback, streaming videos, 3D gaming, 3D interfaces, etc., are already stretching the capabilities of current single core mobile processors. In order to further increase the performance and stay within mobile power budgets, it is inevitable that all mobile processors will eventually have multi-core processors. Mobile operating systems such as Android, Windows¢ç CE, and Symbian are capable of operating in a multi-core environment, and have the features required to efficiently harness the multiple processing cores of the underlying hardware. Also, popular Web browsers and most PC games are already multithreaded, and users will see tremendous improvements in performance if these applications are ported to run on multi-core CPU-based mobile processors.  
NVIDIA Tegra was designed to harness the power of Symmetrical Multiprocessing and deliver a phenomenal Web browsing experience, highly responsive user interfaces, effective multitasking, and tremendous battery life improvements.