LG unveils AMOLED innovation for Sol
Follows Samsung in differentiating phones with new display feature; Sony Ericsson socializes Walkman brand
By CAROLINE GABRIEL

Published: 23 August, 2011

READ MORE: LG Electronics | Display | Handset | Android


 
Samsung has ruthlessly exploited its huge market lead in AMOLED mobile displays to differentiate its Galaxy smartphones, and rivals have often found themselves unable to secure supplies of the bright screen technology - HTC last year adopted SuperLCD alternatives for some models because of shortages. However, while Samsung retains the lead in the most cutting edge AMOLEDs, and will introduce its HD version next month, its display rivals are starting to ramp up production and announce their own innovations. One of these is LG, which has supplied its handset division with 'Ultra AMOLED', a screen that can be easily read in bright sunlight.

This innovation appears first in the new LG Optimus Sol, a midrange member for the Korean firm's growing Android smartphone family. However, it is likely to turn up in higher end models during the holiday season, and - unlike Samsung's most advanced AMOLED designs - be offered on the open market. LG has supplied displays to Apple, though the latter has not opted for AMOLED, but has its own LCD-based RetinaDisplay screen, which is likely to assemble a list of manufacturers including LG, Toshiba, Hitachi and Sharp.


As well as its distinctive 3.8-inch screen - which achieves its image quality using a two-fold advanced reflection rate - the Sol features Android 2.3 (Gingerbread), a slimline design, and claims to be the most affordable 1GHz/AMOLED model on the market. "By introducing a no-nonsense phone that boasts one of the best displays on the market, we think we have a real winner for consumers looking for a subtle but visually stunning phone," commented Jong-seok Park, CEO of LG's mobile communications company.

Another innovation is an enhanced idle-based power management system to boost battery life by 20% to 30%. With the Dark UI selected, the Sol uses less white light in order to conserve the battery. There is multimedia connectivity via DLNA and Wi-Fi Direct, and a 5-megapixel camera. Pricing is to be confirmed, and roll-out will start in Europe next month and then move to Latin America.

Also on the Android front, Sony Ericsson introduced Live with Walkman. The smartphone shows the OEM reversing an earlier, and bemusing, decision to downplay the iconic brands of its Sony parent in favor of its own names such as PlayNow. The new handset boasts of deep social media integration with Walkman music content and services.

The device has a dedicated Walkman hardware button offering instant music player access and options to like, share and discover content via Facebook. Users may also access Facebook via Live with Walkman features such as the photo gallery or phonebook. There is also the Infinite button, which supplies recording artist data, music videos and lyrics search, and there is access to the firm's Qriocity content services platform and TrackID app. Live With Walkman also includes Sony's xLOUD technology, which enhances audio output.