Gartner is the latest of the big analyst houses to release its numbers for smartphone and overall mobile sales in Q2. The picture it paints is one of a market that has, effectively, one winner at the moment: Android ? and more specifically Samsung ? with growth for Apple¡¯s iPhone ¡°paused¡± as users hold out for the next iPhone and ride out the tough economy.

Worldwide, there were 419 million phones sold to end users, is down 2.3% compared to a year ago, Gartner says. Just over one-third (36.7%) of all devices sold were smartphones, which continued to grow well even as the wider market (which includes feature phones) declined. Sales of smartphones were up by 42.7% to 154 million units, with Apple and Samsung together accounting for 83% of all smartphone sales.

Within the smartphone category, Android, led by Samsung, is reaping the most benefits from that growth at the moment. With nearly 99 million units sold, Android devices captured 64% of the smartphone market for the quarter (compared to 43.4% a year ago). Samsung¡¯s Galaxy line of devices accounted for more than half of all Android sales, reaching 45.6 million devices sold.

And as a testament to the power of a good, new product launch, the new S3 sold 10 million units in its first two months of its release. ¡°The Galaxy S3 was the best-selling Android product in the quarter and could have been higher but for product shortages,¡± Gartner notes.

Apple¡¯s iOS-based iPhone devices, meanwhile, also saw growth, selling nearly 29 million units, but this was only in line with overall smartphone market expansion, so its share remained largely the same: it captured 18.8% of the smartphone market (versus 18.2% the year before). Gartner notes that sales of the iPhone fell by 12.6% compared to Q1.

Both Symbian and RIM saw big drops and are both hovering between 5% and 6% market share for sales last quarter, while Samsung¡¯s bada and Microsoft saw modest, single-percentage gains to be level at 2.7% shares (equivalent to around 4 million devices).

Incidentally, do you remember when Nokia said it sold 4 million Lumia devices in Q2? That paints a particularly bad picture for how well the other OEMs are doing with WP7: between the rest of them they sold only about 87,000 devices, according to Gartner¡¯s numbers. Ouch.

