Bluetooth GPS Receivers

Bluetooth GPS receivers provide the perfect solution for travelers who need to navigate their journey, or field service workers who need to report to a location they are not aware of. The technology is generally used for vehicle tracking, aviation and marine navigation, and provides various positioning applications to cater to the needs of the user.

What is Bluetooth?
Bluetooth is a wireless protocol which uses radio technology called frequency-hopping spread spectrum. It is used for the exchange of data over short distances from fixed or mobile devices, and provides a solution for the problem of synchronization in case of multiple devices. For data transfer with the help of Bluetooth technology, the data to be sent is divided into small chunks and transmitted on up to 79 frequencies, with a gross data rate of 1Mbps. Bluetooth makes the communication possible only if the participating devices are in a given range, which generally lies between 100 meters for Class 1, and 1 meter for Class 3 Bluetooth. For the Class 1 and Class 3 Bluetooth, the maximum transmitted power is 100 mW and 1 mW respectively. Bluetooth provides a wireless medium to connect and exchange data between devices like mobile phones, laptops, desktop computers and video game consoles, using 2.4 GHz short-range radio frequency bandwidth.

Bluetooth GPS Receivers
These receivers provide an alternative to the traditional and obtrusive Global Positioning System (GPS) which involved the usage of messy cords and antennas, for its connection to a pocket PC or a mobile phone. These traditional GPS systems reduced portability of pocket PC's by adding unwanted weight to it. Usage of Bluetooth, to wirelessly connect the GPS receivers to the device, eliminates all the mentioned inconveniences and provides optimal satellite reception. The first requirement for the connection of a Pocket PC or other device to a Bluetooth GPS receiver, is the Bluetooth compatibility of the device. Each receiver comes with software that typically includes maps of the country in which the user wants to drive a points-of-interest (POI) database and features like optimal route recalculation. The term GPS 'puck' refers to an antenna that is designed to receive GPS signals from satellites and appears as a small disc.

Bluetooth wireless technology is also helpful to turn a PDA into a fully functional handheld navigation system, without the hassles of dealing with convoluted cables, sleds or expansion slots. The wireless connectivity in case of Bluetooth allows the user to place the GPS receiver at a place more accessible for the satellite signals. The essential components required for the transformation are, a PDA or mobile phone, Bluetooth GPS receiver, satellite navigation software, memory card containing digital maps and information of the chosen region, and a car charger in case the battery of device goes dead.

The navigation systems built for cars are usually very expensive because of the sophisticated devices involved in the setup. But if one has a compatible mobile phone or PDA, it gets easier and cheaper to set up a navigation system. This can be done easily by buying a Bluetooth GPS receiver and navigation software, and connecting it with the PDA or mobile phone. It increases flexibility of the system as well as can be used for navigation while walking too.