Sony Announces New Editing Suites For Vegas¢â Pro And Movie Studio Platinum
PR Newswire
MIDDLETON, Wis., Nov. 19, 2012 /PRNewswire/ -- Sony Creative Software, a leading global provider of professional editing and authoring applications, today released two suite packages, Movie Studio Platinum: Visual Effects Suite 2 and Vegas¢â Pro 12 Suite. Both come equipped with versions of the visual effects software HitFilm 2 from London-based development company, FXhome. These new collections enable users to dramatically enhance their productions with professional special effects via a seamless and integrated workflow. Vegas Pro 12 Suite also offers a diverse bundling of professional audio and video editing applications, soundtracks, and more.
(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20110411/LA80300LOGO)
Movie Studio Platinum: Visual Effects Suite 2 has all the creative tools needed to produce professional-looking movies. Sony Creative Software offers interoperability between HitFilm 2 Express and Movie Studio Platinum 12 to turn ordinary videos into entertaining masterpieces. Users can seamlessly move media between applications to efficiently utilize effects and editing tools from both products. Ideal for the beginning filmmaker, HitFilm 2 Express enables users to add visual intensity to movies with advanced 3D compositing, extensive 'film-look' filters, and over 100 visual effects."With a range of effects, like smoke, explosions, and muzzle flash, the inclusion of HitFilm 2 in both Movie Studio Platinum: Visual Effects Suite 2 and Vegas Pro 12 Suite gives video editors the ability to achieve the realistic and dramatic look they desire in their productions," said Dave Chaimson, vice president of global marketing for Sony Creative Software. The suite also allows users to easily edit video in almost any format including high definition and stereoscopic 3D, while extensive audio and video production tools help editors achieve feature-film results in their studios, with a wide variety of delivery options.
Movie Studio Platinum: Visual Effects Suite 2 ? New Feature Highlights:
Application Interoperability: Easily and seamlessly move media between Movie Studio Platinum and HitFilm 2 Express Visual Effects: Access more than 100 effects for blur, distortion, color manipulation and more. Combine multiple effects to create entirely unique results. Speedy Editing: Basic editing is now easier and faster with Split and Trim buttons on the main toolbar. Multiple Tracks: Produce intricate video projects or record multi-track audio with up to 20 video and 20 audio tracks. 64-bit Support: Access more system RAM when working on larger projects for a better editing experience. Straightforward Windows: Setup your project for AVCHD or stereoscopic 3D with the New Project dialog. Deliver a movie in a variety of formats with the Make Movie window. Project setup and delivery has never been easier.
The Vegas¢â Pro 12 Suite is a full-featured production environment for video editing and compositing, multi-track mixing, sound design, visual effects, and disc authoring. Included in this major editing suite is Hitfilm 2 Ultimate, the perfect tool for advanced filmmakers and industry professionals who want to add sophisticated visual effects and true 3D compositing to their projects. Master audio in Sound Forge¢â Pro 10, automate your editing workflow with Production Assistant, and add the perfect musical background with 100 Sony Sound Series: Production Music soundtracks. Burn finished projects to a DVD or Blu-ray Disc¢â with DVD Architect¢â Pro 6, or render them to a variety of professional formats."Vegas Pro 12 Suite exemplifies Sony Creative Software's dedication to offering cutting edge, integrated professional products," says Dave Chaimson. "This bundle includes some of our biggest and brightest professional applications for multimedia production and adds a new workflow with one of the most powerful visual effects tools on the market. This bundle is the professional editor's one-stop shop."
Vegas Pro 12 Suite ? New Feature Highlights:
Master Suite: Vegas Pro 12 Suite includes: Vegas Pro 12, Sound Forge Pro 10, DVD Architect Pro 6, Production Assistant 2, HitFilm 2 Ultimate, and 100 Sony Sound Series: Production Music soundtracks. Application Interoperability: Send video events from the Vegas Pro timeline directly to HitFilm 2 Ultimate. As effects are added and saved in HitFilm 2, the changes instantly appear in the Vegas Pro timeline, no rendering or "flattening" of the project is required. Dynamic Video Editing Tools: Access interactive, powerful timeline trimming with the Expanded Edit mode. Use the Smart Proxy workflow for improved editing performance. Precise Audio Editing: Import, record, edit, and export high-quality 24-bit, 192 kHz audio files, with sample-based audio precision, and multichannel file editing and processing. Color Match: Automatically match the color characteristics of images shot with different cameras, or shot at different times of the day with different lighting conditions. Simplify Masking: New rectangle/square and oval/circle Masking Tools make it easy to mask portions of media by drawing the desired shape over the appropriate areas.
Movie Studio Platinum: Visual Effects Suite 2 is now available for purchase at retailers worldwide and online at www.sonycreativesoftware.com. Manufacturer's Suggested Retail Price (MSRP) for Movie Studio Platinum: Visual Effects Suite 2 software is $199.95 USD.
Vegas Pro 12 Suite is now available at retailers worldwide and online at www.sonycreativesoftware.com. Over a $2,500 dollar value! Manufacturer's Suggested Retail Price (MSRP) for Vegas Pro 12 Suite software is $1,199 USD.Already own a copy of Vegas Pro 12? Purchase the upgrade pack, which includes the additional Suite products at the Manufacturer's Suggested Retail Price (MSRP) of $599.95.
About Sony Creative SoftwareSony Creative Software inspires artistic expression with its award-winning line of products for digital video, audio, and music production, as well as industry leading technology for DVD production and Blu-ray Disc¢â authoring. Sound Forge¢â Pro, ACID¢â Pro, and Vegas¢â Pro software have defined digital content creation for a generation of creative professionals. These signature product lines continue to advance media production by providing powerful, accessible tools. Today, there is a Sony Creative Software application for every level of expertise, including a full line of consumer software based on the company's professional applications. In addition, Sony Creative Software distributes the revolutionary SpectraLayers¢â Advanced Audio Spectrum Editor application (WIN/MAC), the extensive Sony¢ç Sound Series collection of royalty free loops and samples, the Sony Pictures Sound Effects Series, and the Production Music line of royalty free production music. Further, the company provides the industry leading tools for enterprise level Blu-ray Disc¢â authoring: Blu-print¢ç and the DoStudio¢â line of authoring applications, Dualstream 3D¢â MVC encoder, and Z Depth¢â 3D subtitle editing application. The company's customers span the globe and include professionals in the film, television, video game, and recording industries, as well as educators, students, and independent artists and producers. For more information about professional and consumer products, visit www.sonycreativesoftware.com.
¨Ï 2012 Sony Creative Software Inc. All rights reserved. Reproduction in whole or in part without permission is prohibited. Sony, make.believe and the Sony and make.believe logos, ACID, Vegas, Sound Forge, Blu-code, Blu-print, Dualstream, DoStudio, and Z Depth are trademarks of Sony. All other trademarks or trade names mentioned are the property of their respective owners.
SOURCE Sony Creative Software