As of February 2012, approximately 46% of American adults own a smartphone.  
The graphics quality of these devices gets better each year.  However, they still have 
many more limitations in graphics processing and storage space than desktop
computers.  This means that applications on these devices should focus on optimizing 
their file sizes and graphics quality in order to maximize the number of devices that can 
run and store them.  Unfortunately, there is no defined metric for graphics resolution on 
smartphones.  This thesis explores what users believe to be the minimum acceptable 
graphics quality in smartphone games and graphics applications.  By using a testing 
program we designed in OpenGL, we were able to find at what point in an image¡¯s 
degradation users found it graphically unappealing and found the app unacceptable.  
Participants gauged four images that degraded over time. For our two high frequency 
images, participants found the minimum acceptable graphics quality to occur at 43
pixels per inch (ppi), while in low frequency images they found minimum acceptable 
graphics quality to occur at around 31 ppi, with the average minimum being 37 ppi.
A Study on Graphics Quality in Smartphone Games
INTRODUCTION
The field of visual communications has been intriguing humankind from the time 
we were painting cave walls.  With the rise of computers we have been striving to 
display clearer and better images on our screens.  Unfortunately, not all screens are 
created equally and many people use smartphones (46% of American adults own one 
[Pew Internet 2012]), which have limited graphics processing power.  Smartphones have 
issues with limited space and processing power or excessive cost.  These limitations
make the goal of constantly present and excellent picture quality inaccessible to the
common smartphone user.  Since not everyone will be able to have the best picture 
quality currently available, where do we draw the line?  The average smartphone user 
does not have the latest and greatest smartphone, but has a midrange Android 
smartphone [comScore 2012] with a 4¡± screen of about 200dpi [Android Developers 
2012a].  Given a smartphones limited space and processing power, our goal was to find 
the lowest level of graphics resolution that users would find acceptable in a smartphone 
game.  This would bring acceptable graphics to most users.
In the following pages we explore what resolutions users found to be acceptable 
and where the line between acceptable and unacceptable image resolution lies.  In 
order to do this, we defined the problem and explored what is currently published 
involving this problem.  We present the design of the data gathering tool and the data 
collected, show its analysis and the conclusions we came to, and then look at what was 
learned and how this study could be improved if repeated
PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
Each day smartphones are becoming better and closer to desktop computers,
with respect to processing power and display quality, but they still have significant 
limitations.  The two we are concerned about are storage space and graphics processing 
power.  For the purpose of this paper we will be referring to the Android smartphone
platform, since Android, as of March 12, 2012 holds a 51% share of all smartphone 
subscribers in the United States (comScore).  Many smartphones have a set capacity 
with no expansion slots or only support limited memory expansion.  For the purpose of 
this paper, I will refer to a high-end smartphone that is popular, the Samsung Galaxy S2.  
The Samsung Galaxy S2, according to Samsung¡¯s website, comes with either 16GB or 
32GB of storage built in with an expandable MicroSD slot up to 32GB [Samsung 2012].  
That gives us a total of 64GB possible, which depending on the user, may be acceptable.  
Someone who streams their media online from sources such as YouTube and Netflix for 
video and maybe Pandora for music would not need a significant amount of storage on 
his or her smartphone.
However, some users like to have media available when they have limited 
service, so we can consider several movies or TV shows on their smartphone as well as a 
few thousand songs.  Assuming a standard song size of 6MB and 7,000 songs with 15 
movies of size 500MB and 30 shows at 200MB we get (6MB*7,000 + 500MB*15 + 
200MB*30) 55,500MB or 55.5GB.   Using the same smartphone as above, we begin with 
64GB and after we have added our media we have (64GB ? 55.5GB) 8.5GB left, which 
still does not account for the Android Operating System space used.  The goal of this use
case is to illustrate that minimizing the size of smartphone applications (apps) is good 
practice in order to help users worry less about smartphone storage space. 
The other reason we have for decreasing app size is that not everyone has access 
to a wireless connection and could worry about data plans and how much data they 
consume.  So an app developer should focus on making their apps a reasonable size to 
maximize the amount of users that can use them.  Also, some of the lower-end 
smartphones have less powerful graphics processors that could cause the game to run 
at unbearably slow frame-rates.  One example of this is when I tried to run Angry Birds 
on my Samsung Moment.  It took over two minutes to load the home page and made 
the game unplayable on my smartphone.
On the other hand, there is the problem of smartphone graphics apps that have 
been optimized for space too well, and have become graphically unappealing, causing 
users to stop using the app.  Our goal was to find the sweet spot where we can optimize 
image resolution (reducing size) while keeping the fidelity users expect (keeping the 
app¡¯s graphics appealing).  This ¡°sweet spot¡± could be used to set a standard minimum 
resolution for graphics quality in smartphones apps, such as games, where there would 
be a significant amount of images that are generated and this could help define the 
minimum resolution needed.PREVIOUS WORK
Many people have noted the limitations of smartphones and pointed out that 
developers need to take these into account when developing for these devices.  
However they only note that one should make sure to optimize image size in order to 
speed up computation and not overload the system, they never note any standards or 
give any guidelines.
In a paper written in 2008 titled ¡°The State of the Art in Mobile Graphics 
Research¡± the same limitations of smartphones I have noted above are listed and they 
look at methods of compression of textures in order to save space and reduce the 
quantity of data sent over a bus [Capin 2008 Pg. 76].  The paper notes that different 
types of compression can be lossier than others, but does not give a standard of what is 
good.
In Romain Marucchi-Foino¡¯s 2012 book "Game and Graphics Programming for 
IOS and Android with OpenGL ES 2.0," he makes a note about texture optimization, 
stating that ¡°Portable-device GPUs have a limited amount of video memory compared 
to desktop cards.  Always remind your artists to keep their texture resolution as small as 
they can to save as much memory as possible" [Marucchi-Foino 2012 Pg. 84].  So once 
again the need for optimization is there, but there is no clear definition of what a 
correct size or optimized size is.
By this problem being noted, but not solved, there was an opportunity for 
research to find a minimum graphics quality acceptable to users that would create a 
guideline for app creators.
An important part of the testing process was being able to make sure each 
participant was able to see the images clearly so that the only degradation they would 
be noticing would be that which we were creating.  So we needed to make sure that the
users would be far enough away from the screen so they would be unable to discern 
single pixels of our LCD display.  From the paper ¡°Capability of the Human Visual 
System¡± we found that ¡°for a human eye with a pupil diameter of 2.5 mm and light with 
a wavelength of 555 nm (the wavelength at which photopic, or cone-mediatiated, vision 
is most sensitive), the maximum resolution would be . . . about 0.92 arc-minutes¡± [Curry 
2003].  We used this number to calculate at what distance a human with perfect 
eyesight would be able to see individual pixels on the screen.  This number helped us 
calibrate our Snellen chart, which we used to determine the distance at which each
participant should stand.