MOGA gaming controller enhances the Android gaming experience

I am thoroughly enjoying my Samsung Galaxy Note II and find the speed of the quad-core Exynos processor to provide a flawless experience. Gaming has gotten much better on the Android platform over the last year, but it can still be tough to control movement without blocking the display. That's where external controllers fit in and a couple weeks ago I ordered the MOGA game controller and see that it is also being promoted by T-Mobile along with the Galaxy Note II.

Check out my image gallery of the MOGA controller, along with the video of me using it with the Note II and Droid DNA.
As you can see in my image gallery you get a free game with the MOGA using the code inside the package. The MOGA package includes the game controller and a pleather soft case that is attractive in black with orange writing. The MOGA controller comes with two analog sticks, right and left shoulder triggers, four action buttons, select and start buttons, and blue and green indicator lights. The back is covered with a soft touch coating and inside each gaming arm you will find a compartment for a AAA battery.

To mount your Android device, works with Android 2.3 and higher devices, you simply flip up the MOGA arm, extend it, and insert your device. The arm extends enough to easily fit in my Note II so any Android smartphone should fit into the controller. There is thick, sticky rubber at the top and bottom of the arm mounting brackets so you can relax knowing your device is secure. There is an on/off switch under the extended arm towards the bottom of the controller.


Now before you can use the controller you first need to visit the Google Play Store and download the MOGA Pivot app. The application walks you through the steps to setup the MOGA, including turning on Bluetooth. Within the app you will find the games that are enhanced for playing with the MOGA controller, a storefront to find and purchase MOGA enhanced apps, settings to setup and sync your controller, and a help section to answer questions. I was able to get Dungeon Hunter 3 and Pac-Man for free and there are even more free games to download. I also purchased Asphalt 7 to enjoy on my Note II. You will not find games like Angry Birds in this app store, but they are not optimized for this type of game.

As you can see in my video, game play is awesome with the MOGA controller and racing games are particularly easy to play. The experience is quite enjoyable and if you play a lot of racing games then it might be worth the $50 to you. I don't play a ton of games, but when I do I want the experience to be good. The MOGA controller makes gaming fun and free from frustration in addition to giving you an experience free from the display being blocked by your finger. You can now purchase the MOGA gaming controller for $49.99.

Related CBS Interactive coverage
CNET: Samsung Galaxy Note 2 review: The ultimate anti-iPhone
Top 5 smartphones for the holiday season
T-Mobile Galaxy Note II first impressions: Samsung stepped up to the plate with this upgrade
Hands on: Galaxy Note II and yes, size matters
T-Mobile Galaxy Note II available today for $379.99, I'm upgrading to it from the GSIII
Samsung adds major functionality to S Pen in Galaxy Note II
T-Mobile and U.S. Cellular announce Samsung Galaxy Note II coming soon