Faster NVIDIA GeForce Drivers Arrive in Time for Call of Duty: Black Ops II

Gamers have enjoyed some great new PC titles this fall, such as Borderlands 2, Guild Wars 2, and World of Warcraft: Mists of Pandaria. Now, two more huge gaming franchises, Call of Duty and Assassin's Creed, are about to unleash blockbuster PC titles.

Both titles take advantage of some of the new technology built into the Kepler-based GPUs we released this year. And just in time, NVIDIA has a new GeForce driver ready to deliver up to 26 percent faster performance than your current driver.

On Tuesday, gamers will be able to jump back into the action in the latest installment of the Call of Duty franchise ¡®Call of Duty: Black Ops II.' NVIDIA worked closely with developer Treyarch on their new DX11 renderer, and helped enable NVIDIA-exclusive TXAA.

TXAA - a technology built into all the new Kepler GPUs - uses techniques similar to those used to create computer-generated effects in movies. Call of Duty is famous for its cinematic feel, so TXAA was a perfect fit.

Our technology is also woven into the fifth major installment of Ubisoft's Assassin's Creed franchise, ¡®Assassin's Creed III,' which will be released next week. NVIDIA worked closed with Ubisoft Montreal on their new game engine to add TXAA and make it truly a next-gen gaming experience.

As you prepare your gaming rig for these titles, make sure to take advantage of the new performance of the GeForce 310.54 beta drivers, released today.

Download the new GeForce 310.54 beta drivers from GeForce.com.

Highlights:

Delivers up to 26 percent faster performance in Call of Duty: Black Ops 2 and up to 18% faster performance in Assassin's Creed III.1
Provides smooth, shimmer-free graphics with NVIDIA TXAA antialiasing in Call of Duty: Black Ops 2 and Assassin's Creed III.
Improves performance by up to 16% in other top games likes Battlefield 3, The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim, and StarCraft II.1
For more details, refer to the release highlights on the driver download pages and read the GeForce R310 article on GeForce.com.

NVIDIA strives to continually give gamers better performance and features with each driver release.  Enjoy the new GeForce drivers and let us know what you think.

1Measured on GeForce GTX 680 vs. GeForce 310.33 beta drivers