Xbox 720 and Playstation 4 to feature upgradeable parts

What the Xbox 720 and Playstation 4 will feature is hard to tell at this point, even with some of the reports that have surfaced over the past few days, but if the rumors prove true, the next-generation of systems from Sony and Microsoft would be featuring upgradeable parts.

According to a report from Product Reviews today, a piece has surfaced alleging that Sony and/or Microsoft may be going with the idea of having upgradeable parts in their systems, allowing them to be improved over time, much like PCs are.

"[This patent] considers sharing computer resources and could be part of the planned design for an Xbox 720, aka Next Xbox, which details a base architecture like you¡¯d see on PCs.


What would you think of upgradeable?
Photo credit:  heavy-hammer.com 
"Those for an upgradeable Xbox 720 point out that Microsoft would control the parts for an Xbox 720, so there shouldn¡¯t be compatibility problems, but this could also lead to higher costs for these parts.

"The bottom-line is if this option were delivered it would give Microsoft a major advantage over the PS4 in our opinion, which is of course based on Sony not going the upgradeable route as well," the report stated.

The piece went on to talk about "transmedia gaming" and how that could play into next-generation systems.

"Transmedia gaming would allow you to play games and run applications at the same time thanks to different components being tasked with each job, so this would happen with a more advanced GPU and CPU combo," the report stated.

Upgradeable parts would be better for consumers to continue to keep their consoles in top technology shape, but it would be unprecedented for that to happen with consoles in gaming's history.

Expense would be a major factor in whether that would happen at all, and with the current state of the economy, it depends on how much Sony and Microsoft want to invest into their next systems.

Would you rather see upgradeable systems or not?

