The LastofUs2: release date, gameplay, trailer, story and more

NaughtyDog created an absolute epic in The Last of Us, cementing itself as a modern masterpiece thanks to its incredible characters and storytelling with a harrowing post-apocalyptic tale. Joel and Ellie remain iconic characters that made us laugh, cry and cringe as they ventured across a battered and broken North America.

The LastofUsPart2 release date ? When is it coming out?

The LastofUsPart2 was revealed with a teaser trailer at PlayStation Experience 2016, but NaughtyDog caveated the reveal with the fact the game is still very early in development, so it¡¯ll be a while until we can get our hands on it.

In a recent interview with Argentinian radio station Vorterix, The LastofUsPart2 composer Gustavo Santaolalla said the title is planned to launch exclusively for PS4 in 2019. Take this with a pinch of salt, but it seems like a plausible launch window to us.

The LastofUsPart2 Story - What¡¯s it about?
NaughtyDog has revealed that The LastofUsPart2 takes place five years after the original left off, with a 19-year-old Ellie acting as the game¡¯s main character. Joel also makes a return, watching over Ellie as a slowly aging old man. The main drive of the narrative is unclear, but we know Ellie is very, very angry about something.

In the reveal trailer she is seen playing a guitar, slathered in blood amongst a pile of corpses. After finishing her song she says to Joel: ¡°I¡¯m going to kill every last one of them.¡± We¡¯ve no idea who Ellie is so pissed at, but it¡¯s clear anger will act as a core theme in The LastofUsPart2. Neil Druckmann has confirmed that Westworld¡¯s Shannon Woodward will play a role in the sequel, although we currently know nothing about her character.

The LastofUsPart2 developer ? Who will do it?
It will be developed by NaughtyDog, the creators of Uncharted, Crash Bandicoot and Jak and Daxter.

The LastofUsPart2 Trailers
Here is the latest trailer from Paris Games Week 2017. Be warned, it¡¯s incredibly graphic and not for the faint-hearted.

The LastofUsPart2 -  What we¡¯d like to see

More terrifying enemies
The denizens of infected we faced in The Last of Us were unsettling to say the least, but never truly terrified us. Unless we happened to be playing on Grounded with no way to defend ourselves. By adopting a new setting, NaughtyDog should also introduce a host daunting new enemies. The infected should be bigger and more challenging. Sometimes, the best tactic might be to avoid them altogether.

Now I¡¯m not about to google cordyceps since I¡¯ll likely bump into countless images of disgusting things, but it¡¯d be cool to see The Last of Us 2 introduce some animals affected by the fungus as new enemy types.

Dialogue choices

Uncharted 4 saw the introduction of brief yet intriguing dialogue choices for us to make, providing a small sense of variety to an otherwise linear narrative. It gave Nathan Drake¡¯s charming, one-liner personality an additional layer of substance, albeit a very superficial one.


Having the ability to respond to various dialogue choices as you explore The Last of Us 2 would be fantastic, far more so when we consider the mature themes this franchise has been willing to tackle. There could be moments of comedic brilliance and sudden heartbreak, emphasized by our personal involvement in each decision. It¡¯d also be nice to have these impact the plot in some way, either through brief mentions or major narrative crescendos.

We¡¯ve seen what narrative choice in post-apocalyptic worlds can do in the likes of Telltale¡¯s The Walking Dead. Being forced to choose who we save in The LastofUsPart2 could be equally heart-wrenching.

A real human threat

If you¡¯ve ever seen The Walking Dead, you¡¯ll know the real enemy isn¡¯t the undead, but those still amongst the living. The corruption people face in the clutches of a broken world is horrifying, making far worse monsters than the virus we all contend with. We saw a small glimpse of this in the first game with random thugs, cannibals, and the fireflies, all of which posed a veil of moral ambiguity that kept us guessing with each passing minute.


The LastofUs2 should go all in on this, painting an antagonist worthy of loathing in a world already filled with disgusting examples of humanity. Joel was capable of some horrendous acts in the closing moments of his journey, doing what he believed was right in a world simply not worth saving.

Greater focus on the multiplayer

To the surprise of many, The Last of Us¡¯ multiplayer was excellent. It translated the crafting and survival mechanics of its single-player into the realm of online skirmishes almost perfectly. You could collect ingredients and craft tools mid-match, getting the drop on your enemy through a range of brutal methods. The repertoire of tools was backed up by a weighty selection of matchmaking options, too.

