Due to rapid development of virtual and augmented reality technologies, due to improvements of
performance parameters and increase of technologies availability, it is important to discover new innovative
approaches of technologies usage in different branches. Architecture and urban planning has an essential role in
our lives and fundamental contribution can be delivered to this field of specialization by modern technologies
like augmented reality (AR). It is important to provide wider use of qualitative AR technologies solutions, to
come out of narrow scope of usages, mostly based on two dimensional data depiction or marker based systems.

Depiction of three dimensional (3D) data is crucial for urban planning stages and using AR technologies it is
possible to achieve more precise evaluation of new constructions and objects look and visual influence on
environmental surrounding.
There are already available solutions for city visualization in virtual reality, but to achieve better results and
improve immersion level of planning process, AR technologies are a key, providing endless possibilities,
however not all ideas can be reached immediately, and still lot of work and research should be done for AR
logical and physical structure. Although Furht [1] bring forward four types of applications that are most often
used for AR research and these applications are advertising and commercial, entertainment and education,
medical, and mobile applications for smartphones. For all that Furht [1] also encourage new directions, because
there are many possibilities for using AR in an innovative way and also new challenges AR is facing to go from
the laboratories to the industry. In this paper the innovation is based on development of application City 3D-AR
for urban planning, allowing to merge real city with virtual three dimensional (3D) buildings (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. Bus station augmented with new building for urban
planning and public discussions
 To enhance the immersion level of urban planning solution, main task is to find a way how to use
augmented reality to allow urban planning experts move around the city streets and project virtual 3D
buildings, allowing to see real city and virtual buildings at the same time. Beneficiaries are architecture centres,
local authorities, companies of architects, art institutions, municipal archives, museums, and market parties. But
not only, as Allen et al. [2] proved, such interactive solutions are great way to increase public participation in
urban planning processes, only functionality of the system should be limited, so the users be able to view the
available 3D models and vote for the models according to personal preference. The idea is to keep the
functionality to a minimum in order to limit any confounding factors in the user experience of the system. As
such, the graphical user interface (GUI) had to accommodate these functions in the most direct, user friendly
way possible. Additionally, the physical structure and immersion level also plays a role, professionals could
have expensive head mounted displays (HMD) with AR support and wearable computer, common users can use
tablets for more reasonable prices (Fig. 1.), however latest achievements in HMD development from Vuzix [3]
offer light way and high performances HMD sets, which have tendency to decrease price year by year. And Arnis Cirulis and Kristaps Brigis Brigmanis / Procedia Computer Science 25 ( 2013 ) 71 ? 79 73
good evolution direction, is that HMDs with AR functionality for mobile devices appears, meaning comfortable
replacement for wearable notebook solutions.
The main challenges of this paper and the project City 3D-AR are depiction of bulky three dimensional
objects in outdoor environment, buildings position detection that depends on participant's distance and viewing
angle. Traditional approach with fiducial markers cannot be used; it is suitable for indoor solutions in short
distances.
Project Work Executed at Sociotechnical Systems Engineering Institute of the Vidzeme University of
Applied Sciences, Virtual and Augmented Reality Laboratory. Two basic sets of hardware and software were
used. The first set consists of tablet PC (Asus Transformer Pad TF300TG) with Android operating system,
integrated position sensors, and visualization software libraries (more detailed in last section). The second set
contains notebook (Asus G71Vseries), head mounted display with functionality of augmented reality (Vuzix
Wrap 920AR), USB positions sensors (OceanServer evalution kit OS5000, Phidgets GPS and Spatial 3/3/3),
gyroscopic mouse (Logitech MX Air Mouse) and VR/AR authoring platform (3DVIA Virtools) with building
blocks for AR support. 