Energy Savings from Using Mobile Smart Technologies

This paper presents the most recent results of energy saving benefits from the convergence of consumer products into a multi-function smart device,
 such as a smartphone or tablet, compared to single-function products (e.g., an electronic clock). 
The energy consumption of selected smart devices was tested using 42 frequently used applications and utilities (e.g., portable gaming, scanning, music players, etc.). 
A range of Operating Systems (OS) were selected for testing: Android OS (Google), Blackberry OS (RIM), iOS (Apple), and Windows 7 OS (Microsoft). 
Testing was conducted using the following smartphones: Blackberry Curve 9300, iPhone 4, Samsung Focus, Samsung Galaxy S; and tablets: iPad 2 and Samsung Galaxy Tablet 7".
In order to investigate the battery consumption, two programs were developed in-house for iOS and Android platforms. 
For the Windows phone, the built-in program was utilized, while a third-party application was used for the Blackberry phone. 
To further test the battery, each device was also decoupled from its battery and hooked up through a measuring device and experiments were then repeated. 
This study shows smart devices save consumers up to $150 annually compared to single-function devices in a range of applications. 
The results from this study demonstrate how smart devices are transforming our society by providing superior functionality at a lesser cost in energy, 
paving the way for other technologies to be integrated into smart devices, and energy reduction to continue.

Index Terms -- Smartphone, Tablet, Smart Device, Energy Consumption, Energy Efficiency, Consumer Electronics, Mobile Technology.

I.  INTRODUCTION
Traditional consumer electronics were designed to perform a single function, and were rarely designed to act as multi-function devices. 
Many single-function devices draw power constantly, even when turned off (e.g., stand-by, hibernation, or sleep mode), creating an increase in energy consumption [1], 
and thus an increase in the monetary burden of the product. 
The advent of smart devices has allowed software developers to create applications that reduce the necessity of owning many single-function devices.
Replacing electronic products with software applications could effectively reduce household energy consumption, and simplify product purchasing and product maintenance.
For this research, 4 smart-phones and 2 tablets were tested (see Table I) to validate the stated hypothesis: that there is a significant energy saving benefit by using a smart device versus several single-function devices;
namely for smartphones: Samsung Focus, Samsung Galaxy S, Blackberry Curve 9300, iPhone 4; 
and for tablets: Samsung Galaxy Tablet 
Smart devices were chosen based on the U.S. market share of their OS in mid-2011 (Figure 1) [2]. 
Android was shown to have the largest share of the market at approximately 36% followed by iOS at 26%. 
Two devices were tested using each of these operating systems (i.e., smartphones and tablets). 
Blackberry held 23% of the market in 2011 but the majority of their phones were not comparable with Android and iOS, as many did not support applications, 
and were therefore not considered ¡°smart¡±. The Windows 7 OS did not hold a significant share of the market, so only one device was tested.

All smart devices were subjected to invasive and non-invasive testing (using an internal software application as indicated in Table I). 
The Samsung Focus (Windows 7 OS) had a built-in application for measuring energy consumption. 
However, to non-invasively measure all smart devices in this study, several comparable applications had to be developed in-house to include those smart devices running Android and iOS. 
The Blackberry Curve 9300 had a third-party application which was used to non-invasively measure battery consumption . 
Figure 2 depicts the screen shots of all the applications used for non-invasive measurements.
Three parameters were monitored during non-invasive testing to include battery life, battery temperature, and battery voltage. 
Not all parameters could be tested on each device due to OS restrictions. Table II identifies those parameters supported by each device and application.

A total of 42 applications were selected from a number of more popular applications reflecting a range of categories to include business, news, games, utilities, etc. 
It was not possible to test all devices against all the applications. Nevertheless, a large number of applications were tested across most of the devices (see Table VI & VII).