Exciting Gaming Technology Trends 2018

Technology is constantly making our lifestyle better by creating unbelievable solutions that deliver unusual, exceptional and interactive experience. Video games have become a pleasant distraction and a great leisure activity for young adults and kids. They are one of those entertainment essentials where digital technology has worked like a miracle to enhance user experience. Game-specific technology has evolved a great deal after entering into the mainstream world and brought one surprise after another for gamers who desired more excitement in their play.

In this blog, we are going to take a thrilling dive into some of the most exciting gaming technology  trends of 2018 that can define the future of gaming. Check it out:

1. Custom Avatars of human face:

Facial recognition system is one of the amazing advances in gaming technology. Using 3D scan and human face recognition, players can create their own replica in the live video games and enjoy the feel of actually fighting the game battle in real time. This inventive approach includes the process of transferring your original expressions to the digitally virtual world where your custom avatar represents you in the game play. Intel RealSense 3D camera is one remarkable innovation that helps mobile game developers design games that cleverly adapt to the human emotions by scanning 78 different points on their face.

2. Mobile Gaming Fever

Smart phones have definitely revolutionized the world of digital gaming by changing from big screen of TV or computers to a compact screen of user¡¯s devices. Mobile games liberate users from living room trap and enable them to enjoy the similar experience even on the go. This is the reason why it is a common sight to spot every next person in your neighbourhood addicted to the digital realities and spectacles offered by mobile gaming. The trend for mobile gaming has successfully disengaged countless gamers from one-room console experience to small-screen magic.

3. Voice-controlled Gameplay

Although voice controlled gaming is not a new invention for gamers, it seems that the use of voice recognition technology in today¡¯s games has almost touched the level of maturity now. Thanks to revolutionary progress made in this area, you can now go controller-free while playing your favourite video games. Modern advances in computing system are responsible for being able to understand different voice commands of users and process them accordingly. Using voice recognition technology, users can now control their game consoles and game play easily. Simply give a command to voice-controlled system and you can even access your social media and play your favourite tracks from media library. Incredible, isn¡¯t it?

4. Splendid Graphics

Video games have progressed far better than the normal restrictiveness of providing 8-bit graphics for gaming. Due to cutting edge, polished and more advanced technology, gamers can immerse in the experiences of semi-realistic world combining real-world structures with fantasy dramas and actions in a high-quality imagery and graphics. The ultimate experience is so enhanced users feel as if they are right inside the game acting like a protagonist.

5. Gesture-Controlled Gaming

The technology goes beyond just voice commands and have capability to interact with gamer¡¯s hand gestures. It is all about how enjoyable the gaming experience gets for gamers. Intel RealSense makes it possible for you to play first person shooter games by interacting with your device by means of specific hand gestures. It relies on 3D camera technology that watches 22 different points in your hand as you wave it around. Keep your movements organic and the computing system will enable a unique gaming experience you have never had before.

6. Immersion of Virtual Reality

Get ready for never before seen immersive experience as you are about to step into unseen virtual reality. The best part about VR technology is that users are guaranteed to get lost in the fantasy-like gaming world that feels surreal. VR game developers are still in the process of releasing commercial VR-based gaming consoles and headsets in the market. Once they are out, gamers will surely brag about the kind of stimulation they experience in their senses through VR headset displays.

7. HD Graphic-friendly Displays

Enter the new world of h igh resolution graphics and forge the old displays. While mobile game designers are using technically sound, spectacular graphics, they need proper display quality to support and enhance the visuals. The pricing for 4K display experience was initially higher when first launched in televisions and laptops. Over the years, the cost went down enough to be adopted for watching your best loved games. So far 1080p was supposed to be an HQ quality of pictures. But with vivid colours, vibrance and crisp visuals of 4K displays, you can take your gaming beauty to all-new extremes.

8. Invasion of Augmented Reality

Considered as a VR sibling by many, Augmented Reality is poised to keep you wallowing in your own world while putting you on the border of dreamy experience. AR can be a best reality companion to those who don¡¯t find exclusively virtual stuff appealing. With all new perspective and interpretations, AR relieves the gamers from the boundaries of TV or computer screen. Bringing the gamers pretty close to unreal experiences, the tricky AR technology can offer gamers the kind of experience where the differences between real world and digital world fade away enough to enchant them. Users can create digital image of their house with objects that are not present in there, or convert their backyard in a playground.

9. Wearable Gaming Experience

Wearable gaming experience has unexplored potential to double the fun for gamers who love to remain discreet while they play it hard. Portable and compact, wearable smartwatches and display glasses that earlier played as fitness tracker and guide for users are now considered as potential gaming device in future. Wearable technology will no longer be restricted to serious purposes. In 2018, we are looking forward to the rise of companies that will inject entertainment and gaming elements into smart wearable devices.

10. Cloud for Gaming

The approach for the way games are built is changing as modern mobile game developers are shifting from hardware system to cloud computing services. Traditional methods of developing video games architecture involve creating a complicated hardware structure while cloud system allows developers to reduce the burden and enjoy more flexibility. Unlike conventional gaming consoles that need physical memory disc, cloud has no such limitations and enables extensive game servers where dynamic images are streamed via internet to user¡¯s device screen.

11. e-Sports Competing With Physical Sports

e-Sports is a live video gaming events that take the shape of international tournaments which is so organized that players vie hard with competitors to defeat them and win the championship. Esports are growing international which will possibly form a trend in 2018. Based on current growth of e-Sports market and increasing love for digital sports, marker leaders firmly state that e-Sports type of games have become a true rival for real sports played physically and are slowly securing more fans than traditional games.

In Conclusion

We believe these are some of the gaming technology trends that are going to hit 2018 market. However, the pace at which the disruption arises is still not precisely predictable. A few of the hurdles that may impede the pace of gaming technology might range from security issues, government rules and user¡¯s readiness to adapt to the changes. Nonetheless, changes and trends are happening and soon we will have users wanting more innovations to enrich their gaming realities.
