PUBG latest news: All the big news, updates and announcements

PlayerUnknown¡¯s Battlegrounds is an immensely popular title. Amassing tens of millions of players across PC and Xbox One, the Battle Royale phenomenon has shown little signs of slowing since its initial March 2017 release.

Such a big audience means there is always plenty of news surrounding PUBG. Whether it concerns new updates, maps, balance changes or anything under the sun, we at Trusted Reviews have it covered.

PUBG Update ? What are the latest changes?
The latest update (1.3) for PlayerUnknown¡¯s Battlegrounds on PC brings with it a host of balance changes and a few new cosmetic options for players to unlock. Bluehole has said this update is relatively minor as they continue to address all the massive changes made in the previous one. Major tweaks this time around involve performance optimisation and the drop rate of weapon in specific areas.

On the Xbox One side of things, Miramar has arrived, giving console gamers two maps to choose from. Beyond that, performance improvements continue to be rolled out for the platform. As always, you can find the full patch notes over on the official site.

PUBG Maps ? What are the latest developments?
The latest map to be introduced in PUBG is the 4¡¿4 Savage, providing players with a tighter, more chaotic battleground to duke it out in.

Currently only playable on test servers in limited sessions, Bluehole has been surprisingly open about the map¡¯s development. In a blog post, it has said ¡°months of work¡± are left before the map¡¯s completion.

An upcoming addition is an underground cave system which players will be able to parachute into directly, adding an extra layer of versatility to proceedings. You can check out some concept art below:

PUBG Corp has confirmed that Miramar will be coming to the platform on April 24, providing console gamers two maps to playgrounds to choose from. Beyond that, performance improvements continue to be rolled out for the platform.

PUBG Platforms ? What can I play it on?
PlayerUnknown¡¯s Battlegrounds is currently available to purchase on PC and Xbox One. The latter is available through the console¡¯s preview programme so be mindful that the game is will continue to undergo patches and improvements and is not a final build.

Bluehole has said in the past that PUBG will eventually come to PS4, although has no concrete plans in motion at the moment. Speaking to InvenGlobal, PUBG Corp CEO Chang Han Kim said, ¡°if we have the opportunity, the final goal would be to launch the title on every platform.¡±

¡°I¡¯d like PUBG to become a universal media franchise based on the game. We want to take part in diverse industries including eSports, movies, drama, cartoons, animation, and more. In fact, we received a couple of lovely calls from a number of developers in Hollywood and Netflix. Our dream is to build a new game-based culture through various ways like this, and have the lead of that culture.¡±

PUBG Mobile ? What is it?
PUBG: Exhilarating Battlefield is an official adaptation of Bluehole¡¯s Battle Royale blockbuster that¡¯s only available to download in China right now. It¡¯s surprisingly faithful to the PC version, complete with similar UI, mechanics and you¡¯re still chasing that chicken dinner at every turn.

Of course, some visual compromises have been made and the upgrade path for your in-game avatar has been altered slightly and now comes with far more customization options. PUBG Corp is yet to announce whether it will see an international release, although you can play it right now by following an online tutorial.

PUBG Player Count ? How many people are playing?
According to SteamSpy, Over 30 million players have purchased PlayerUnknown¡¯s Battlegrounds on PC and it continues to hold the record for most concurrent players at any given time. Last month marked the first monthly period where the overall install base didn¡¯t increase, although this sort of plateau was to be expected.


Over on Xbox One, the hugely popular Battle Royale title has now surpassed 4 million players despite only launching in preview form during December 2017. Console owners are hungry for chicken dinner, that much is clear.

The mobile version, which has grown wildly in popularity since launching worldwide, now boasts over 10 million daily users across iOS and Android. Not too shabby.


