Curves, Gestures May Be in iPhone's Future
By John P. Mello Jr. 
Apr 5, 2018 10:02 AM PT

apple may introduce curved screen and gesture controls for iphone
Gesture control and a curved body may be in the iPhone's future.

Apple has been experimenting with those features for the iPhone, and they could be ready for prime time in two to three years, Bloomberg reported Wednesday, citing "people with knowledge in the matter."

Gesture control would allow a user to execute tasks without touching the screen.

The technology could be used for more than just answering phone calls and opening apps, noted Gartner analyst Tuong Nguyen.

"It could be used to enlarge the user experience," he told TechNewsWorld.

"It could be folded into an umbrella of multi-modal user experiences -- understanding what you want through a gesture, a touch, voice or a biometric," Nguyen suggested. "Gesture will be a bigger play than just ignoring a phone call with a wave of your hand."

Risky Curves
Curved displays aren't new. Samsung's latest Galaxy models, the S9 and S9+, have them. Even the iPhone X has a slight curve at its bottom.

However, it appears that Apple has been experimenting with curving the display gradually from top to bottom. Samsung curves its displays at the edges.

The use of OLED displays gives phone makers the ability to bend the screens in their devices.

"The ability to bend the display allows for a more flexible design for the phone," explained Tirias' Krewell. "I expect this will allow for a more comfortable and organic shape in the hand."

That said, the merits of curved screens don't seem to have captured a lot of interest.

"Curved screens have been tried before in smartphones and TVs, and they don't seem to have had much resonance with consumers," noted ABI's McQueen.

"I think it would be risky to adopt curved screens into Apple's portfolio unless it is implemented in a way that hasn't been seen before and is more subtle than previous attempts, which is what Apple does best," he added.