Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) is one of the essential elements of SoCs (system on a chip) that power today’s smartphones. It is a co-processor responsible for calculations related to generating images intended for a smartphone’s display. Its aim is to lighten the load on CPU and boost the device’s overall performance in all graphic-intensive tasks, such as 3D games, animations, etc.Today's smartphone GPUs are typically licensed for embedding in other manufactuers’ SoCs. For example, Apple-designed chipsets are all powered by PowerVR GPUs. One of the latest implementations includes the 6-core Series 7XT GT7600 integrated with Apple A10 Fusion which powers iPhone 7 and 7 Plus.
While PowerVR is now mainly used in Apple devices, it was also embedded, for example, in Mediatek Helio X10 used in Android-based HTC One S9 and X9, as well as Xiaomi Redmi Note 2 and 3.
In the Android world, the most popular GPUs are Qualcomm's Adreno and ARM's Mali series which you can find in most smartphones in every price category. For example, different models of Qualcomm's Adreno were used in the flagship Samsung Galaxy S8 (Adreno 540) as well as the low-end Xiaomi Redmi 4 (Adreno 505).
ARM Mali can be found in some well-known Android devices too, including Samsung Galaxy A7 (Mali-T830MP3), or Huawei P10 (Mali-G71 MP8), although the majority of flagship phones are powered by Adreno which you can see in the table below.
DeviceAtlas offers User-Agent strings parsing algorithm that identifies devices and looks them up in a massive database which includes a number of device characteristics. Given that smartphone GPU vendor and GPU model are among these properties, DeviceAtlas can report on the share of web traffic generated by smartphones equipped with any GPU available.
We noticed that the ARM Mali gets the largest share in developing markets, such as Nigeria (53%), Colombia (45%), and India (42%). Countries where Qualcomm's Adreno has a significant share include Argentina (44%), Poland (40%), Spain (37%), and Germany (31%). The popularity of PowerVR clearly reflects the overall popularity of iPhones, given that today PowerVR GPUs are rarely used in other devices. Thus, PowerVR gets a very high usage in Australia (63%), USA (59%), and Canada (56%).
The following stats are based on web traffic to a network of partner websites using DeviceAtlas for web optimization and redirection.