Smartphones are Smarter with an All-In-One Processor

The performance of your smartphone is influenced by many factors, including the operating system, manufacturer, and wireless carrier. 

But there’s one essential and often-overlooked element that’s largely responsible for the speed, efficiency, and battery life of your smartphone—the processor. 

Here’s a simple guide to how it works, and what makes an all-in-one processor so powerful.


The Processor


The processor is the central hub of your smartphone. 

It receives and executes every command, performing billions of calculations per second. 

The effectiveness of the processor directly affects every application you run, whether it’s the camera, the music player, or just a simple email program. 

Pick the wrong one and you could experience sluggish, stuttering apps and limited network performance, regardless of carrier, manufacturer, or operating system.


When you swipe your way down a web page, you’re commanding the processor to make billions of simultaneous and instantaneous interactions. 

When you do something more complex, like playing an online multiplayer game with 3D –intensive graphics or capturing 1080p video, the load put on a processor can be quite immense. 

The ability of the processor to coordinate efficient communication between the wireless data, graphics, and memory is essential to smooth operation.

The CPU, GPU, audio and video engine, connectivity features (GPS, WiFi, FM), and 3G/4G modem are the major components of a processor that control the operation of your smartphone. 

Let’s take a look at what they do, and how they work together with the processor to make every action so seamless.


The All-In-One Design


Sometimes these components exist as different chips in a device, but the exceptionally powerful and power-efficient processors have all of them situated on a single chip. 

When they’re grouped together onto the processor, it’s referred to as “integrated.” 

Bringing them closer together provides advantages for the operation of your phone, like faster communication and reduced power consumption. 

Old-style, un-integrated processors and their scattered circuitry simply can’t keep up. 

The pinnacle of the integrated design, though, is the “all-in-one” processor.

An all-in-one processor brings all of your smartphone’s major components together, improving performance and efficiency across the board by reducing the distance signals and data need to travel. 

Integrated processors that bring together some components but leave others isolated do not maximize communication speeds like an all-in-one.

The all-in-one Qualcomm Snapdragon is custom built to include the CPU, GPU, camera, radio, modem, memory controller, and more. 

It also integrates voltage regulators for better power management, improving battery life even further. 

By bringing all of these pieces together, and being the first processor to integrate a 4G LTE modem, 

Snapdragon processors can provide amped up performance, improved battery life, smooth multitasking, and high-speed data. 

Many popular smartphones, like the Samsung GALAXY S4, the HTC One, and the Nokia Lumia, run on Qualcomm Snapdragon all-in-one processors