The PlayStation 3 may not have had the impact that its predecessor the PS2 did on gaming, struggling to top the online-multiplayer-savvy Xbox 360, but Sony's machine is now well remembered as a powerful console with some top exclusives.

First released in Japan on November 11, 2006 and then in the US on November 17, the console didn't actually make it to Europe or Australia until March 27, 2007, over four months later.

That was thanks to a mass-production shortage of a component needed for the Blu-ray player in the PS3. But thankfully, it eventually arrived and over its seven-year lifecycle it's had quite the catalogue of games.

Narrowing down all of those games to just 10 has been quite the tricky task, but we've done it. So here are our top 10 best EVER PS3 exclusives – that means they only came out on PS3.

So no GTA IV, sorry.

10. inFamous 2 (2011)
Although the first inFamous was a great game, it was inFamous 2 that really nailed the whole superhero simulator thing.

It took what the first game had and improved upon it in every way. Story and character, combat, environment, enemy AI, the powers, and visual polish all receive an upgrade to make it one of the best games on PS3.

After all, who doesn't want to feel like a superhero... or supervillain, if the mood takes you.

Buy now

9. Heavy Rain (2010)
Developer Quantic Dream proved that it knows how to tell a powerful story when it released Heavy Rain. A tale of a father looking for his son and a serial killer, it forced you to make some major human decisions and decide who to trust along the way.

Plus, it broke the mould in terms of delivering some stunning mo-cap work, especially for facial capture and minute expressions.

We'll never forget the events of Heavy Rain - even if its successor Beyond: Two Souls couldn't live up to the expectations it set.

Buy now on PS3 or PS4

8. Ni No Kuni: Wrath of the White Witch (2013)
Studio Ghibli graphics and style crossed with a take on a classic RPG. Ni No Kuni: Wrath of the White Witch had everything going for it from the start. Plus, it was made by Level-5, the same studio that brought you games like Professor Layton, Inazuma and Yo-Kai Watch.

Both Ghibli and Level-5 have cherry-picked the very best elements from their own past and combined them with the best that the genre has to offer.

Buy now

7. Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots (2008)
For us this is when Metal Gear Solid really took off. Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots managed to ditch the flaws of its predecessor, introduced a massive variety to its weapons and gameplay and the story was top notch.

We'll always have fond memories of the epic cutscenes and narrative sequences, even if they did get a bit tedious at times.

Buy now

6. Demon's Souls (2009)
Anyone who loved Demon's Souls loved it despite the fact it made you want to hurl controllers through the screen, scream curse words incredibly loudly and occasionally cease playing the series entirely.

In reality it walks a careful line of accessibility and challenge, playing with the feelings of risk and reward too.

You lot are gluttons for punishment, aren't you?

Buy now

5. God of War III (2010)
In the middle of the PS3 cycle, everyone thought that Uncharted 2 was the epitome of graphical ability on the console. And then God of War III arrived.

It managed to be not only an amazing technological achievement, but also a fantastic gaming experience that improved, tweaked, expanded, polished, and refined everything from God of War II, even if it maintained it hack 'n' slash roots.

Buy now on PS3 or PS4

4. Journey (2012)
Although the previous games from developer ThatGameCompany were great, it was Journey that really sealed the deal.

Journey was an imaginative bridge between art and video game, which actually turned out to be an innovative, emotional and almost ethereal co-operative experience with the first truly seamless multiplayer the world had seen.

It was and still is a Journey that everyone should take.

Buy now on PS3 or PS4

3. LittleBigPlanet (2008)
There hadn't been a game like LittleBigPlanet before. It was a platformer with a difference.

Yes it had an adorable hero, our little Sackboy, but it was also beautifully elegant and a powerful creative tool that put unlimited potential in the palm of your hand.

"Play. Create. Share" became a mantra that changed gaming for the better.

Buy now

2. The Last of Us (2013)
When anyone tries to tell you that video games aren't art, point them towards The Last of Us and its spectacular storyline.

The way the relationship between protagonists Joel and Ellie developed over the course of the game, combined with the fantastic gameplay, made it not only one of the best games on PS3, but one of the best games of all time.

Naughty Dog just gets better and better. Just look at Uncharted 4.

Buy now on PS3 or PS4

1. Uncharted 2: Among Thieves (2009)
If we had to limit ourselves to picking just one Uncharted game for our PS3 top 10, then there's no question it had to be Uncharted 2: Among Thieves.

It remains to be one of gaming's most memorable experiences ever, offering a fantastic blend of shooting, climbing, laughing and regularly gasping at the amazing storyline and antics of Nathan Drake himself.

Buy now on PS3 or PS4