The Vulkan Graphics API Is Here?and Your NVIDIA GPU Is Ready

If you're a GeForce gamer, you already have what you need to take advantage of what the Vulkan API can do. 

If you're a developer, you will now have the choice of a new tool that will give you more control, and greater performance, on a broad range of devices.

Our support for Vulkan, on the day it launches, not just on multiple platforms, but in cutting-edge games such as The Talos Principle, has some of the industry's most respected observers taking notice.

"To be able to play a game like The Talos Principle on the same day an API launches, is an unheard of achievement," said Jon Peddie, president of Jon Peddie Research. NVIDIA's multi-platform compatibility and fully conformant driver support across many operating systems is a testament to the company's leadership role in Vulkanos development."

Vulkan is a low level API that gives direct access of the GPU to developers who want the ultimate in control. 

With a simpler, thinner driver, Vulkan has less latency and overhead than traditional OpenGL or Direct3D. 

Vulkan also has efficient multi-threading capabilities so that multi-core CPUs can keep the graphics pipeline loaded, enabling a new level of performance on existing hardware.

Vulkan is the first new generation, low-level API that is cross platform. 

This allows developers to create applications for a variety of PC, mobile and embedded devices using diverse operating systems. 

Like OpenGL, Vulkan is an open, royalty-free standard available for any platform to adopt. 

For developers who prefer to remain on OpenGL or OpenGL ES, NVIDIA will continue to drive innovations on those traditional APIs too.

vulkan-transparent-webVulkan was created by the Khronos Group, a standards organization that brings together a wide range of hardware and software companies, including NVIDIA, for the creation of open standard, royalty-free APIs for authoring and accelerated playback of dynamic media on a wide variety of platforms and devices. 

We're proud to have played a leadership role in creating Vulkan. 

And we're committed to helping developers use Vulkan to get the best from our GPUs.

Why You Should Care
Vulkan is great for developers. 

It reduces porting costs and opens up new market opportunities for applications across multiple platforms. 

Best of all, the NVIDIA drivers needed to take advantage of Vulkan are already here. On launch day we have Vulkan drivers available for Windows, Linux, and Android platforms. 

See our Vulkan driver page for all the details.

Here's what Vulkan will mean for you:

For gamers with GeForce GPUs: Vulkan's low latency and high-efficiency lets developers add more details and more special effects to their games, while still maintaining great performance. 

Because a Vulkan driver is thinner with less overhead, application developers will get fewer performance surprises. This translates to smoother, more fluid experiences.

NVIDIA is shipping fully-conformant Vulkan drivers for all GeForce boards based on Kepler or Maxwell GPUs running Windows (Windows 7 or later) or Linux. 