Moss

Moss¢â is a single-player action-adventure puzzle game and new IP from Polyarc tailor-made for the VR platform. 
It takes classic components of a great game?such as compelling characters, gripping combat, 
and captivating world exploration?and combines them with the exciting opportunities of virtual reality.

In Moss, players meet Quill, a young mouse with dreams of greatness beyond the confines of her settlement. 
While exploring the woods, she finds a mysterious Glass Relic and an ancient magic is awakened. 
With her uncle now in grave danger, Quill must embark on an epic journey?and she needs you there by her side. 
Together, you'll travel to forgotten realms, solve challenging puzzles, and battle menacing enemies. 
Alone, no one can conquer what you're up against. But united, you just may defeat even the darkest of villains.

Gameplay
Reach into The World of Moss
Your every action has meaning. 
Moss takes full advantage of today¡¯s virtual reality technology, letting you move objects, battle enemies, 
and manipulate the field of play as the key ally to our hero, Quill.

Adventure to Fantastic Places
Travel to a lively world that hums with wonder and legend. 
Explore caves, forests, and foreboding ruins that are filled with ancient artifacts, mysterious creatures, and sprawling views.

Form a Unique Bond
Your abilities are complementary to Quill¡¯s in an alliance for the ages. 
Combine classic, action-adventure controls with a world that responds to your touch. Solve puzzles, combat evil, and achieve victory together.

A Story Told Unlike Any Before
From its opening pages, Moss will draw you into a first-of-its-kind fully immersive world of myth and magic. 
Enjoy a rich tale of intriguing characters, illustrious artifacts, and legends old and new.

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
MINIMUM:
OS: Windows 7/8.1/10 (64-bit versions)
Processor: Intel Core i5-6600K / AMD Ryzen 5 1400 or equivalent
Memory: 8 GB RAM
Graphics: Nvidia GeForce GTX 970 / AMD RX 480 8GB or equivalent
DirectX: Version 11
Storage: 12 GB available space
RECOMMENDED:
OS: Windows 10 (64-bit)
Processor: Intel Core i7-4790 / AMD Ryzen 5 1500X or better
Memory: 8 GB RAM
Graphics: Nvidia GeForce GTX 1070 8GB / AMD RX Vega 56 8GB or better
Storage: 12 GB available space