Microsoft Buys GitHub for $7.5 Billion, Moving to Grow in Coding¡¯s New Era

Microsoft, fully embracing a model it once saw as a threat, said on Monday that it was buying GitHub, an open software platform used by 28 million programmers, for $7.5 billion.

The deal is a bid by Microsoft to gain ground in the internet era of software development, where applications increasingly run on remote data centers ? on so-called cloud computing.

Amazon is the leader in the cloud market so far, but Microsoft has transformed itself in recent years to become a strong No. 2 as a supplier of cloud computing services. 

Its vital Office productivity applications and database software are available in cloud versions.

Microsoft also competes with Google, IBM, Salesforce and others in the cloud marketplace. 

All of them are trying to lure software engineers to use their cloud tools and services. 

The more programmers on a company¡¯s platform, the more software applications are created, attracting customers and still more developers ? a flywheel of growth and profit.

GitHub, founded in 2008 and based in San Francisco, was created largely as a community for software developers to share programming tools and code. 

It has been a champion of the open-source software movement, with its ethos of freely sharing code in public.

Today, GitHub is used by a wide range in the tech community, from lone programmers to the nation¡¯s largest companies. 

Developers can share code, make comments and buy software tools. They work in digital storage spaces, called repositories. 

Some are open to all users; others are closed to members of a team. GitHub now has more than 85 million code repositories.

Individuals can use GitHub for free. But there are monthly subscription charges for extra storage, development tools and private repositories. 

The company does not disclose its revenue, but analysts estimate it is running at $200 million a year.

The open-source model was once anathema to Microsoft, the largest commercial software company, which had favored keeping its code proprietary. 

Steven A. Ballmer, Microsoft¡¯s former chief executive, once called Linux, the popular open-source operating system, a ¡°cancer¡± in the body of the technology business.

But Microsoft has come to embrace open-source tools. Today, Microsoft is the most active corporation on GitHub, with more than two million contributions of code to GitHub projects.