All-Screen, Notchless Lenovo Z5 To Debut On June 5

Lenovo's next-generation Z5 smartphone with an all-screen and no display notch will make its official debut on June 5, the company announced.

Smartphone Notches
Apple introduced a new trend with its iPhone X, which sports a cut-out at the top of the display--more commonly referred to as a display notch--to accommodate the front camera and sensors.

The trend caught on and more OEMs have embraced the solution, but consumers aren't necessarily happy with display notches on smartphones. The move has been controversial so far and some OEMs eventually resorted to alternatives such as launching phones with a notch and an option to hide it.

All-Screen Lenovo Z5
However, Lenovo seems to have found a different solution to offer an all-screen smartphone without resorting to a notch, to begin with. The Lenovo Z5 will be a notchless, bezel-free smartphone with a whopping screen-to-body ratio of 95 percent.

The smartphone is still shrouded in mystery for the most part, with no specs details available, but Lenovo did share some sketches and teasers to give a glimpse into what the smartphone will bring. No real photos of the Lenovo Z5 are available yet, but that will change next week when the smartphone formally launches.

Lenovo Z5 Launch
Lenovo took to Weibo, China's equivalent of Twitter, to announce the upcoming event. The Lenovo Z5 reveal is set for June 5 at 2 p.m. local time in Beijing (11 p.m. PDT, 2 a.m. EST) and will show the device in all its glory.

It remains unclear at this point how the Lenovo Z5 will sport an all-screen and still feature a front camera and sensors without adopting a display notch, so it will be interesting to see what Lenovo came up with.

Considering the effort Lenovo is putting into launching an all-screen smartphone without a notch, it would make sense for the Lenovo Z5 to feature high-end specs and features as well.

What To Expect?
No spec details have been confirmed so far, but the handset should feature a large screen with a high resolution (likely QHD or QHD+), a powerful processor (Snapdragon 845?), at least 4 GB o3 6 GB of RAM, high-resolution cameras, Android Oreo on board out of the box, and advanced features to complete the package.

At the same time, a premium design with top-notch specs will likely mean a high price tag as well, albeit it's tough to anticipate exactly how much it will cost.

We'll keep an eye out for Lenovo's announcement June 5 and bring you the official scoop straight from the source, so stay tuned.
