OPPO ANNOUNCES THE N3 SMARTPHONE, FEATURING TOUCH FINGERPRINT SENSOR FPC1021.
On October 29, Oppo announced its global flagship Android smartphone N3, being the first smartphone to feature FPC's touch fingerprint sensor FPC1021.

Jörgen Lantto, acting President and Chief Executive Officer of FPC, comments: 
"Oppo is a leading smartphone manufacturer in China with a large overseas export and we are proud that Oppo selected FPC1021 for this flagship launch. In addition to safely and conveniently unlocking the phone, the touch fingerprint sensor is used to control the movable camera and to protect the photo album. FPC1021 is 33% smaller than FPC1020, still supporting same level of performance, including 360 degree finger rotation capability, fast response time and extremely low power consumption. Touch fingerprint sensors from FPC raise the bar and provide a never-before-seen superior user experience. FPC on the 7th of July 2014 announced this Design Win anonymously. "

For more information contact:
Jörgen Lantto, acting CEO Fingerprint Cards AB (publ), +46 (0) 31-60 78 20,
investrel@fingerprints.com
About Fingerprint Cards AB (publ)
Fingerprint Cards AB (FPC) markets, develops and produces biometric components and technologies that through the analysis and matching of an individual's unique fingerprint verify the person's identity. The technology consists of biometric sensors, processors, algorithms and modules that can be used separately or in combination with each other. The competitive advantages offered by the FPC's technology include unique image quality, extreme robustness, low power consumption and complete biometric systems. With these advantages and the ability to achieve extremely low manufacturing costs, the technology can be implemented in volume products such as smart cards and mobile phones, where extremely rigorous demands are placed on such characteristics. The company's technology can also be used in IT and Internet security, access control, etc.

Fingerprint Cards AB (publ) discloses this information pursuant to the Swedish Securities Market Act (2007:528) and the Swedish Financial Instruments Trading Act (1991:980). The information was issued for publication on October 29, 2014 at 12.00 CET.

Important information
Issuance, publication or distribution of this press release in certain jurisdictions could be subject to restrictions. The recipient of this press release is responsible for using this press release and the constituent information in accordance with the rules and regulations prevailing in the particular jurisdiction. This press release does not constitute an offer or an offering to acquire or subscribe for any of the company's securities in any jurisdiction.