Discovery-based Games for Learning Software
Tao Dong,1 Mira Dontcheva,2 Diana Joseph,3 Karrie Karahalios,4 Mark W. Newman,1
Mark S. Ackerman1
1 School of Information
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
{dongtao, mwnewman,
ackerm}@umich.edu
2 Advanced
Technology Labs
Adobe Systems,
San Francisco, CA 94103
mirad@adobe.com
3 Community Help
and Learning
Adobe Systems,
San Jose, CA 95110
dmjoseph@adobe.com
4 Department of
Computer Science
University of Illinois,
Urbana, IL 61801
kkarahal@cs.uiuc.edu
ABSTRACT
We propose using discovery-based learning games to teach
people how to use complex software. Specifically, we
developed Jigsaw, a learning game that asks players to
solve virtual jigsaw puzzles using tools in Adobe
Photoshop. We conducted an eleven-person lab study of the
prototype, and found the game to be an effective learning
medium that can complement demonstration-based
tutorials. Not only did the participants learn about new tools
and techniques while actively solving the puzzles in Jigsaw,
but they also recalled techniques that they had learned
previously but had forgotten.
Author Keywords
Discovery Learning; Learning Games; Software Training
ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces And Presentation]: User
Interfaces - Training, help, and documentation;
INTRODUCTION
When learning how to use software applications users often
switch back and forth between two strategies: trial-anderror
and searching for help [9]. Tutorials are a popular
form of help content, as they offer step-by-step instructions
for how to accomplish a task. But step-by-step
demonstrations do not encourage deep understanding and
do not facilitate transfer of skills to new contexts.
The work described in this paper demonstrates that games
designed for guided discovery learning can supplement
tutorials as an effective learning aid for software
applications. We study this approach in the context of a
complex photo editing application, Adobe Photoshop. The
photo-editing domain is a particularly interesting one, as
non-experts are often interested in using professional
quality software.
To study how games can encourage discovery-based
learning of software applications, we built Jigsaw, a virtual
jigsaw puzzle game, and embedded it inside of Adobe
Photoshop. Each puzzle in Jigsaw focuses on a specific set
of Photoshop tools. Some puzzles are exact virtual analogs
of physical jigsaw puzzles, and the user is expected to
restore a picture that has been broken into multiple pieces
using selection and transformation tools (see Figure 1a).
Other puzzles ask the user to adjust some puzzle pieces to
match the rest of the image (see Figure 1b). Although each
puzzle offers hints on tools that might be appropriate, the
user is free to solve the puzzle using any technique.
We observed 11 participants as they played Jigsaw and
found that not only did the participants learn about new
tools and techniques while tinkering with the puzzles, but
they also recalled techniques that they had forgotten. In the
following sections, we describe the related research, the
design of Jigsaw, and our preliminary evaluation.
RELATED WORK
Discovery-based learning encourages learning by exploring
and interacting with the environment, wrestling with
questions, and performing experiments [2]. Research has
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI’12, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA.
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1015-4/12/05...$10.00.
Figure 1. Jigsaw includes two types of puzzles. a) Some puzzles ask the user to put the image together by selecting and
transforming pieces. b) Others ask the user to adjust the colors of certain puzzle pieces to match the rest of the image.
shown that when sufficient guidance is present, selfdirected
learning results in better recall and promotes deep
learning [4,8] especially for those with some background
knowledge [10]. The software learnability community has
taken this approach to develop a number of training tools
such as Guided Exploration cards, the Minimal Manual, and
Training Wheels, which were empirically found to be more
effective than learning from software manuals [3].
Although there are many games that embrace discovery
learning [1], there are few examples emphasizing learning
of software applications. The two games that stand out are
Microsoft Ribbon Hero and The Monkey Wrench
Conspiracy, which provide a narrative story that leads users
through small tasks to help them accomplish a broader goal.
While there is some exploration in these games, users are
encouraged to solve tasks using a specific strategy or
technique. In Jigsaw, we allow users to solve each puzzle
with any strategy. In a related but sufficiently different
domain, RoboCode [7] encourages users to learn how to
program by asking them to program the behavior of battle
tanks. Though its success was an inspiration to us,
RoboCode was designed for a very technical and highly
motivated community. We focus on software environments
that are used by people with varied levels of expertise.
JIGSAW DESIGN
By combining design principles in educational games [6]
and guided discovery learning for software [3], we designed
Jigsaw with the following goals in mind:
• provide a clear goal
• allow multiple paths to success
• structure and guide exploration
• give feedback on progress
• and make it fun!
Clear goal and multiple paths to success
The benefit of building on top of an existing game is that
anyone who is familiar with jigsaw puzzles will
immediately understand the goal of playing Jigsaw: to
match the target image. Although Jigsaw extends the
original gameplay by introducing more manipulations to
puzzle pieces (e.g. scaling, color adjustment, light
adjustment, etc.), the fundamental goal remains the same.
Jigsaw does not prescribe how players should solve each
puzzle. An advanced user might experiment freely to find
the most efficient way of solving a puzzle, while a beginner
can follow the hints and tutorials to pursue a safer path. For
those who want a challenge, Jigsaw offers the Speedrun
mode, which requires that a puzzle be solved in under a few
minutes, and the Blacklist mode, which requires that the
puzzle be solved without certain tools. The Blacklist mode
encourages users to find alternative techniques for tasks that
they already know how to do.
Structured and guided exploration
Jigsaw structures the learning experience by focusing on
one set of tools in each puzzle and systematically ordering
the puzzles to prepare users for more challenges. Moreover,
Jigsaw provides customized hints for each puzzle. There are
three different types of hints, and they serve different
purposes. First, the brief instructions printed directly on the
puzzle canvas explain the goal of the puzzle and suggest the
tools that the player should use. Second, the player can
click on Hints (Figure 2) to find links to external tutorials
describing the tools suggested by the puzzle. Finally,
complete beginners can open a step-by-step video that
demonstrates how to solve one piece of the puzzle.
Feedback
Providing feedback is regarded as one of the most
important features in both play and learning [6]. To this
end, Jigsaw analyzes the player’s puzzle and reports on the
number of correct and incorrect puzzle pieces (Figure 2).
Each correct puzzle piece results in skill points for the
player. To analyze the player’s puzzle and find correct
pieces, Jigsaw compares the user’s puzzle to a solution file
and computes the mean squared error (MSE) of the RGB
pixel values for each piece. If the error is below a threshold,
the puzzle piece is considered correct. Although this
technique is simple, it works reasonably well for many
images. Jigsaw is implemented as an Adobe Photoshop
extension using the Adobe Creative Suite SDK. The game
user interface is a Photoshop panel that allows users to
browse and open available puzzles, get feedback and hints,
and track their points.
PRELIMINARY USER EVALUATION
Based on Kirkpatrick’s four levels for evaluating training
[5], we conducted an eleven-person within-subjects lab
study to examine:
• Reaction: how do users react to Jigsaw?
• Learning: what do users learn, and how do they
learn by playing Jigsaw?
• Behavior: can users transfer what they learn to
realistic tasks?
The study did not cover the Results level in Kirkpatrick’s
model, because it tests for long-term improvement. We
recruited 11 students (6 males, 5 females, 10 graduate, 1
undergraduate) through a mailing list at a large public
Figure 2. Jigsaw automatically evaluates the user's progress.
university. All participants had at least some prior exposure
to Photoshop but were not experts.
Each study session consisted of five components and lasted
for one hour. (1) First, we conducted a background
interview to learn about the participants’ experience with
Photoshop, their general learning styles, and their gaming
experience. (2) We then assessed the participants’ existing
knowledge of Photoshop with 9 sets of before-and-after
images. We asked each participant to describe a strategy for
turning each before image into the corresponding after
image. Each of the 9 image sets required manipulations
with tools that corresponded to a puzzle in Jigsaw. This
initial assessment allowed us to establish a baseline for
tracking participants’ development of Photoshop skills
throughout the session. (3) Next, we had the participants
play Jigsaw. All participants started with the puzzle about
layers, one of the most fundamental features in Photoshop,
and then played more puzzles of their choice. We asked
participants to think aloud as they were solving the puzzles.
(4) To evaluate whether the participants could transfer what
they learned in Jigsaw to real tasks, the study moderator
asked them to complete the before-and-after tasks for which
they had provided unsatisfactory answers in the initial
assessment. The session ended with a discussion about
learning outcomes, engagement with Jigsaw, and user
interface improvements.
Reaction: effectiveness and engagement
All participants reported that playing Jigsaw was an
effective and fun learning exercise, and most of them
recognized the unique value of the discovery learning
experience Jigsaw provided. For example:
“I would recommend it to other active learners like me. It
supports trial-and-error learning.” (P1)
“The puzzles gave me an objective and a goal… It
definitely helped me learn something that I probably
would have missed.” (P10)
While participants did not feel interacting with Jigsaw was
as fun as pure gaming, they considered it an engaging
learning experience. First of all, the metaphor of jigsaw
puzzles was attractive to participants who like leisure
games. P4, a self-identified Sudoku fan, made the following
comment while she was rotating and scaling puzzle pieces:
“This is one of those things where I could get very
obsessive about getting it exactly right.”(p4)
Second, the feedback provided by the auto-grader (Figure
2) was considered to be “great” (P4), “smart” (P6), and
“rewarding” (P7).
Third, novel setup of puzzles could serve as the catalyst of
engagement. For example P5 liked a puzzle that revealed
the right pieces only when the layer order was right:
“You really need to figure out what’s going on, [and]
what’s the secret. It’s more interesting and challenging
[than other puzzles].” (P5)
However, we also found that engagement diminished when
the task was too challenging or the help content was not
effective. For example, P8 did not follow the puzzle
progression and jumped to the advanced selection puzzle
before completing some of the easier puzzles. Also, he
chose to play in the Speedrun game mode. However, he did
not know how to complete the puzzle and looked for help in
a text tutorial. It would not have been possible for any
participant to read all of the text and complete the puzzle in
the fast-paced Speedrun mode. P8 was not successful in
completing the advanced selection puzzle and had to go
back to more basic puzzles. In contrast, participants who
followed the systematically designed sequence of puzzles
and viewed the step-by-step demonstration videos appeared
to have a more satisfactory experience.
Learning: what and how
The participants exhibited visible improvements in many
aspects of Photoshop expertise: understanding operation
dependencies (e.g. activating the right layer before applying
any operations on it), awareness of functionality (e.g. the
Grow command that can expand a selection), locating
hidden tools (e.g. the Quick Selection tool is hidden under
the Magic Wand tool), understanding functionality (e.g.
how the sliders of a Levels Adjustment Layer work), and
adopting shortcuts (e.g. holding the Shift key to make
additive selections).
Those improvements were achieved by three main
mechanisms of learning facilitated by Jigsaw: discovering
by exploration, actively following demonstrations, and
refreshing skills.
Discovering by exploration
From our observations, both successful attempts and
mistakes led to discovery of new facts and techniques. For
example, when P6 was using the Magnetic Lasso tool for
the first time, he made a lucky guess that led to successful
completion of the puzzle:
“Now I'm kind of confused. There is a cursor here, but
also a line there. I don't know which one is the starting
point. Is the upper-left corner or the bottom-left corner? I
think it looks like the bottom-left corner, so… (P6 clicked
the left button of the mouse) Yes, I was right!” (P6)
On the other hand, P1 was not as lucky in his first few
attempts with the Quick Selection tool, but he finally
figured out that he had to activate the right layer before he
could use the Quick Selection tool properly.
We found that the participants’ general knowledge about
how complex applications work could make their
explorations more fruitful and efficient:
“I know this from my previous experience. Because in
Windows or Mac, when you want to select more than one
thing, you press Shift.” (P6)
The hints in Jigsaw effectively helped raise participants’
awareness of features and guided their exploration:
“What it told me in the question mark thing [the hints]
was enough to get me going. Then I could figure out the
details.” (P7)
The techniques the participants learned through exploration
were reinforced through practice in subsequent puzzles.
Actively following demonstrations
Eight participants viewed the tutorials embedded in the
game panel. While some participants considered tutorials as
their last resort and avoided them until they were really
stuck, others viewed tutorials before attempting to solve the
puzzle. The different preferences in consulting tutorials
were consistent with the participants’ general learning
styles as stated in the background interviews.
The tutorials and puzzles supplemented each other
effectively. Jigsaw motivated participants to apply the
content of tutorials immediately after viewing. This
facilitated the transformation of the operations they knew to
techniques they could employ.
Refreshing skills
In addition to the discovery of new facts and techniques
about Photoshop, playing Jigsaw also helped participants
recall operations they had forgotten. Interestingly,
participants often did not realize that they knew an
operation until they performed it. For instance, one of the
puzzles asked participants to reorder layers to make all
black and white pieces visible. P5 was staring at the Layers
panel, and said, “Actually I don’t know how to reorder the
layers.” But immediately after he said that, he dragged a
layer and moved it above. “Oh, Okay!” He seemed to be
pleased by the fact that dragging worked. Later when he
was asked whether he previously knew that he could drag
layers, he said, “I think I did. I just forgot.”
Behavior: transfer of skills
In Kirkpatrick’s training evaluation model, the Behavior
level is concerned with the ability to apply acquired
knowledge and skills to new contexts. To assess
knowledge transfer we asked participants to complete one
or more of the before-after tasks they did not know how to
do at the start of the study. Using the skills they developed
playing Jigsaw, all of the participants were able to complete
tasks they did not know how to do at the start of the study.
DISCUSSION
The results of our preliminary user testing of Jigsaw show
that drawing on the familiar concept of Jigsaw puzzles and
providing feedback using an automatic grader has
effectively transformed an otherwise serious training
activity into an active game-like experience for learning
complex software applications, such as Adobe Photoshop.
Moreover, we found that Jigsaw’s progressive challenge
levels and the embedded hints are both important and
helpful in creating a supportive environment for users to
engage in discovery-based learning.
Nonetheless, our observations also suggest that we need to
improve the timeliness of hinting, the granularity of
feedback, and the level of engagement to make Jigsaw more
effective and fun. We plan to explore just-in-time hinting to
encourage more exploration and prevent frustration. Also,
we hope to offer feedback on the process in addition to the
results, as the less-experienced participants requested more
granular feedback for new tools. Last, we want to support
collaborative play, which will allow players to learn new
editing techniques from one another.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Raschin Fatemi, Will Riley, and our participants
for their help and contributions.
REFERENCES
1. Bruckman, A. Can Educational Be Fun? Game
Developer’s Conference, San Jose, California, (1999).
2. Bruner, J.S. The act of discovery. Harvard Educational
Review, (1961).
3. Carroll, J.M. An overview of minimalist instruction.
Proc. HICSS 1990, IEEE (1990), 210-219 vol.4.
4. Hmelo-Silver, C.E., Duncan, R.G., and Chinn, C.A.
Scaffolding and achievement in problem-based and
inquiry learning: A response to Kirschner, Sweller, and
Clark (2006). Educational Psychologist 42, 2 (2007),
99–107.
5. Kirkpatrick, D.L. Evaluating training programs: the four
levels. Berrett-Koehler ; Publishers Group West
[distributor], San Francisco : Emeryville, CA, 1994.
6. Linehan, C., Kirman, B., Lawson, S., and Chan, G.
Practical, appropriate, empirically-validated guidelines
for designing educational games. Proc. CHI 2011, ACM
(2011), 1979-1988.
7. Long, J. Just For Fun: Using Programming Games in
Software Programming Training and Education-A Field
Study of IBM Robocode Community. Journal of
Information Technology Education 6, (2007), 280–290.
8. Mayer, R.E. Should There Be a Three-Strikes Rule
Against Pure Discovery Learning? American
Psychologist 59, 1 (2004), 14.
9. Rieman, J. A field study of exploratory learning
strategies. TOCHI 3, 3 (1996), 189–218.
10. Roblyer, M.D. Integrating Educational Technology into
Teaching. Prentice Hall, 2005.