Buying a processor for a gaming rig isn¡¯t as hard as it used to be. Now that AMD¡¯s Ryzen and Intel¡¯s 8th-gen CPUs debuted with more performance and cores than ever before, it¡¯s hard to buy a stinker these days?especially since most games favor graphics firepower over CPU oomph. But all that said, there are specific chips that stand out from the horde as the best gaming CPUs due to their price, performance, or nifty extras.
Whether you¡¯re on a budget or willing to pay for sheer face-melting speed, these are the best CPUs for gaming PCs that you can buy.
Picking a processor locks you into compatible motherboards, which themselves offer a wide array of features. Be sure to check out PCWorld¡¯s guide to AMD Ryzen and Intel 8th-gen motherboards once you¡¯ve chosen a CPU to make sure you snag the best hardware for your needs.
Pound for pound, Intel¡¯s Core i5-8400 is the best gaming CPU for most people. Games love speedy CPUs, and the Core i5-8400 leans on the blistering single-thread performance of Intel¡¯s 8th-gen processors with fast Turbo Boost clock speeds to deliver performance just a smidge behind the best-in-class Core i7-8700K, per PC Gamer and TechSpot?and the 8700K costs far more money. Intel bumped Core i5 chips to six CPU cores this generation, giving the Core i5-8400 plenty of oomph for multi-threaded games and everyday desktop activities despite its lack of Hyper-Threading.
The Core i5-8400¡¯s price is right, too. It costs $180 on Amazon and that¡¯s with a stock CPU cooler bundled. The faster, unlocked Core i5-8600K costs $245 on Amazon without a fan. You won¡¯t be able to overclock the Core i5-8400, but it shouldn¡¯t matter. This thing screams out of the box, and unless you want to run multiple graphics cards, forgoing an overclockable K-series chip means you probably don¡¯t need to pick up a pricey Z370 motherboard, letting you save even more money with an H370 or B360 motherboard instead.

The Core i5-8400 is blazing fast and an outstanding value, but it might not be the chip for you if gaming isn¡¯t your strong focus. The six CPU cores can handle plenty of tasks, but if you plan on streaming, video/image editing, or very heavily multitasking, the 2nd-gen Ryzen 5 2600X ($230 on Amazon) might be a better option if you don¡¯t mind spending an extra $50. Its six cores are multi-threaded, giving you a total of 12 threads, and all Ryzen chips can be overclocked. The Ryzen is a more well-rounded chip, but for pure gaming chops, go with the Core i5-8400.