Gaming PC & GPU Demand to Boost AMD’s Growth

Per IDC, PC shipments remained flat in the first quarter of 2018 compared with the anticipated decline of 1.5%. The traction witnessed by gaming PCs is likely to have averted the decline.
 
Per a Jon Peddie Research (“JPR”) report, with an increase in the number of people engaging in PC gaming, the related hardware market is experiencing a huge boost. Per the research firm, the market exceeded $30 billion mark in 2016 and is anticipated to witness compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 6% through 2019.

Notably, growth in the gaming hardware market is driving demand for graphics processors as well. Per Allied Market Research, the GPU market is anticipated to reach $157.1 billion by 2022 at a CAGR of 35.6% from 2016 to 2022.

We believe both AMD and NVIDIA are well poised to benefit from the strong demand of gaming PCs. However, AMD’s expanding GPU portfolio catering to every price points is well-poised to threat NVIDIA’s dominance going forward.

Despite its late entry, AMD is attaining the position of a major player in GPU market. The company started small, targeting the low-end segment and gradually built a position for itself.

JPR report reveals that AMD impressively increased its GPU shipments and gained market share from 14.2% to 14.9% in the first quarter of 2018. The gain can be primarily attributed to the robust adoption witnessed by the company’s expanding product portfolio for workstations and cryptocurrency mining.

Furthermore, increasing adoption of AI techniques and machine learning tools in industries like gaming, automotive and blockchain are primarily responsible for driving GPU demand. AMD is benefiting from this demand.

Although Intel’s market share dipped from 67.4% to 66.6%, the company continues to be a leader. Meanwhile, NVIDIA maintained its market share at 18.4%.

We believe that the launch of the new graphics cards will help AMD increase its market share further, going forward. Shares of AMD have returned 52.4% year to date


