A console Roguelike is a Roguelike game that can be played on a video game console without installing a Linux distribution such as Xbox Linux or PS2 Linux on the device. Nearly all such games are commercial in nature, although the recent surge in homebrew software consoles has led to creations such as the Wii ports of Powder and Dungeon Crawl Stone Soup.

Since the majority of consoles do not feature support for a mouse or keyboard, the complexity of the games is usually considerably reduced compared to those developed for computer systems. Game design aspects often held to be conventional among computer Roguelikes, such as character creation, are often streamlined or eliminated entirely.

The overwhelming majority of console Roguelikes are created by Japanese developers, with Chunsoft being easily the most notable and influential creator of them.

A note on obtaining these games: You may be able to find console games on Ebay. Before buying a Japanese game, ask around to make sure it will work with your game system and local television standard.

Most console systems can be emulated by more powerful hardware, although the accuracy and ease of emulation varies between the console emulated, the system emulating, the emulator used and the software being emulated. A general rule of thumb is that the generation of console hardware which debuted most recently will be difficult if not impossible to emulate, the generation before it can usually be emulated with a very powerful computer system, and console generations before that are usually quite easy to emulate unless you have a very old computer (or the system targeted for emulation is obscure and poorly documented). Emulators which mimic cartridge-based consoles (such as all Nintendo hardware before the Gamecube) use ROMs, the common term for the Read-Only Memory images dumped from the cartridges themselves. Most CD-based emulators can work with either the original discs or various CD image formats, such as ISOs.

Consoles (and handhelds) released after 2000 also tend to be able to run emulators for systems notably less powerful than them, but almost always require the user to perform some form of modification on the hardware (usually warranty-voiding) or use some sort of potentially illicit device (such as a flash RAM cartridge). Some "legal" emulation exists, usually through collections of old games or download services, but those generally are not relevant to this article.

The most important note to make about emulation, however, is that obtaining commercially-released games via the internet is illegal, at least in most places you're likely to read this article. Some homebrew or "liberated" (commercial made freeware) games exist, but despite what you may read, it is generally illegal to obtain console/handheld games from the internet, even if you own them already (in the US, at least, any backups you own should have been made by you). Admittedly, you usually won't get caught and the rare legal action is usually against a site that hosts them (or those who create hardware which allows consoles and handhelds to play pirated software), but you are warned nonetheless.