Arm, the influential designer of mobile processors, wants your Android phone to run faster -- and maybe your ultralight 
Windows laptop, too.On Thursday, the company announced a new chip generation, the Cortex-A76, that it said will be 
35 percent faster than today's models when it arrives in 2019 phones. That's a big jump for one year, and perhaps enough 
to help Android phones that rely on Arm processors better match Apple's iPhones. "We think we've turned a corner relative 
to the overall performance curve," Rene Haas, president of Arm's intellectual property group, said at a press conference 
Thursday in San Francisco. He promised "laptop-class performance" and said it should compete with Intel's high-end Core i7 
models.Arm was actually co-founded by Apple in 1990 and designed the chips used in Apple's ill-fated Newton personal digital assistants. Apple's A series of processors, 
like the A11 Bionic model in the iPhone X and iPhone 8, are now designed in-house at Apple, but they use the Arm language, called an instruction set. 
The vast majority of Android phones, though, use chips from companies like Qualcomm and MediaTek that not only use Arm's instruction set but also its full-on chip designs, too.
Those Android Arm chips don't match Apple's in performance, though. On the Geekbench speed test comparing chip performance 
of Android devices to Apple devices, Apple is well ahead. A faster chip will help not only Android but also two other Apple 
competitors, Microsoft's Windows and Google's Chrome OS, both of which are using Arm chips in power-efficient laptops.
"Apple currently leads in raw CPU performance, which is impressive," said Patrick Moorhead, analyst at Moor Insights and 
Strategy. "Arm speeding up the designs is a big deal, as it is targeting Windows 10 PCs and Chromebooks." How will Arm's 
in-house designs compete with Apple's? "I expect we'll do well against Apple," said Mike Filippo, Arm's lead processor 
architect. But he was clear which company Arm considers its primary rival. "Our real competition is Intel," he said. "We're 
building for sustained performance," Filippo said. "The A76 is the biggest leap we've taken in our annual roadmap since 
we started in 2014." The 35 percent speed boost is a minimum, Filippo said. Some mathematical tasks will get a boost of 50 
percent to 70 percent, and high-performance software that needs fast memory access should get a 60 percent to 95 percent 
boost for fetching that data, he added. Performance improvements vary depending on which speed test is used, he cautioned, 
adding that Arm used SPECint for its measurement of a 35 percent performance boost. The Cortex-A76 has about the performance of today's Intel Core i5-7300, Filippo said. 
Configured with more cache memory, it should compete with an i7 chip, he said.
One reason the new chip design will be faster is that it can ingest more instructions in parallel -- four instead of three, 
he said. The chip design also speeds up memory communications and improves its ability to get a jump on upcoming processing 
instructions it'll have to handle. "This is a brand-new microarchitecture," a design four years in the works, Filippo said. 
"We've paid maniacal focus to make sure every transistor we put into this design pays for itself in terms of performance."