Smartphone Graphics
by Fish Chin
The Graphic Processing Unit (GPU), also known as graphic card, is a specialized circuit designed to accelerate the image output in a frame buffer intended for output to a display.
Different kinds of GPU perform differently. GPUs are very efficient at manipulating computer graphics and are generally more effective than general-purpose CPUs for algorithms where processing of large blocks of data is done in parallel. Modern smartphones are equipped with advanced embedded chipsets that can do many different tasks depending on their programming. GPUs are essential parts of these chipsets and as mobile games are pushing the boundaries of their capabilities, GPU performance is becoming increasingly important. The GPU is a special piece of hardware that is really fast at doing certain types of math calculations, especially floating point, vector and matrix operations.
The GPU is a very important component in our smartphone devices. If you have a good GPU device, you can play all types of games if you have selected the right device with the right processor. I know most of us don¡¯t have much knowledge about GPUs in smartphone devices, so I will try to briefly explain the top GPUs available in the smartphone market.
There are various brands of GPU in the market such as PowerVR, Mali (GPU), Adreno, and Tegra. These are the GPUs currently most used in the smartphone devices. For example, Apple¡¯s iPhones always provide a great gaming experience, because PowerVR is the brand which provides their GPU to Apple¡¯s devices.
Currently, PowerVR GT7XT is the fastest GPU series for smartphones. It is used by many Apple products like iPad Air 2, and the iPhone 6S and 6S Plus which both contain the A9 SoC chipset. It is part of the powerful 7XT GPU series which is based on unified shader architecture with 6 clusters that integrate 192 (FP16) / 384 (FP32) ALU cores (the upcoming model has 16 clusters and 512-1024 ALU cores). Compared to any 6XT GPU, it provides a much more efficient and improved performance. Thus, we can see why Apple¡¯s products always have the best gaming performance among smartphones.
The second-fastest GPU is Nvidia Tegra X1. This GPU uses architecture called Maxwell, and can be called the improved version of Tegra K1 with more CUDA cores, two geometry units and 16 texture units, 16 ROPs, high memory bandwidth 25.6 GB/s and LPDDR4 memory. Nvidia is trying to provide their best gaming experience in both smartphones and computers. Although there are pros, the cons with the Nvidia Tegra GPU unfortunately result in not many smartphone companies implementing this GPU in their devices.
Next, the GPU ARM Mali series of  GPUs are semiconductor intellectual property cores produced by ARM Holdings. Mali T880 MP12 is the fourth gen GPU used by Samsung Exynos 8890 chipset and the chip integrated into Samsung Galaxy S7 and Galaxy Note 7. Mali T880 MP12 is the best GPU for Samsung Galaxy S and Note series. Mali T880 series has 3 variants and MP12 version clocked up to 650 Mhz with 12 cores, but it can be built with up to 16 cores/clusters without any significant loss in performance.
Lastly, the Qualcomm Adreno is also a big competitor to PowerVR, Mali (GPU), and Nvidia Tegra. Qualcomm Adreno 430, released in the beginning of 2015, is an integrated graphic card designed exclusively for Android smartphones and tablets. The GPU used in Snapdragon 810 SoC, which is integrated into many high-performance Android devices, was built with technology known as FlexRender. The GPU uses 192 unified shaders at the speed of 650 MHz; it could be faster than this but heating issues forced the developers to reduce its clock rates.