Migration and Execution of JavaScript
Applications between Mobile Devices and Cloud
Xudong Wang Xuanzhe Liu Ying Zhang Gang Huang
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (Peking University), Ministry of Education
fwangxd10, liuxzh, huanggang, zhangying06g@sei.pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Currently, mobile devices might suffer from their own limited
resources to support complex Web applications. We
present a framework that can offload JavaScript applications
to cloud. Based on dynamic analysis and profiling, our approach
partitions the computation-intensive tasks for remote
execution and efficiently improves performance.
Categories and Subject Descriptors D 2.7 [Distribution,
Maintenance, and Enhancement]: Restructuring,reverse engineering
and reengineering
Keywords Cloud computing, JavaScript, offloading
1. Introduction
Currently, the JavaScript language is capable of realizing
complex computation logics in advanced applications.
Meanwhile, with the advance of mobile computing, the mobile
Web applications become very popular on various devices,
including laptops, smartphones, and tablet computers.
Since Web applications become more complicated, they recruit
increasing amounts of computation, storage and communications
from constrained supply on mobile devices.
To alleviate the performance overhead on mobile devices,
it is a natural idea to migrate the computation intensive
and consuming code fragments from “weak” devices
to powerful server with plentiful resources[3]. For example,
recently popular Amazon Silk Browser leverages
the cloud resources to improve end-user experiences on
the mobile devices. However, compared with most popular
Object-Oriented programming language like C++ and
Java, JavaScript stakes a rather extreme position in the spectrum
of dynamic features[1]. Everything might be modified,
including the fields and methods of an object or its parents.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SPLASH’12, October 19–26, 2012, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1563-0/12/10.
This is a challenge for existing static analysis techniques.
This paper proposes a JavaScript offloading framework,
called ExtremeJS (EXtensive TRansformation and Elastic
Migration and Execution of JavaScript) for seamlessly use
of ambient computation to augment JavaScript Web applications
on mobile devices, making them fast and resource
efficient.
2. Contributions
The contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:
 We present a framework for enabling the elastic migration
and execution of JavaScript Web applications between
mobile devices and cloud, without any modification
of original applications.
 We provide a partitioner for automatically identifying
costs of computation intensive and time consuming portion
in the application, through static and dynamic code
analysis.
 We experimentally validate our approach by exercising
a prototype implementation of ExtremeJS framework
based on series of experiments. The evaluation results
show that ExetremJS can adapt JavaScript based application
partitioning to different computing and communication
environments, and can help some applications
achieve as much as almost 10x execution speedup on the
mobile device.
3. Approach
One design principle of ExtremeJS lies in the intuition that,
as long as execution on the cloud is much faster (and more
secure and more reliable) than that on mobile devices, paying
the cost for sending the relevant data and code from the
mobile device and back may be worth it. ExtremeJS performs
partitioning at first class function level to keep flexibility
on what to run where. Another design principle of
ExtremeJS is that, when an application is loaded, ExtremeJS
aims at automatically extracting the computation intensive
83
Figure 1. The ExtremeJS Framework
and resource consuming parts of the JavaScript code as well
as the corresponding runtime contexts. By defining some
partition constraints, the behavior of JavaScript code is preserved
in the presence of first-class functions, prototypebased
scope chains, et al. It promises the migration of codes
and contexts can be consistent and safe.
In ExtremeJS, when the modified JavaScript application
is running, the automatically chosen code fragments are migrated
from the mobile device to a cloned context on a cloud,
remaining the functionality of the un-migrated code on mobile
devices. The application would suspend if it attempts to
access the migrated state and objects that are dynamically
modified. The migrated codes are executed in the cloned
contexts on a cloud, possibly utilizing the features of hosting
platform such as CPU, memory, hardware accelerators,
enhanced software runtime, etc. Eventually, the execution
results are returned to the client and merged with the original
application context on mobile device. An optimizer is
employed to optimize migration code fragment according
to expected execution conditions. The whole architecture of
ExtremeJS prototype is shown in Figure 1. For page limited,
we briefly describe the main three components.
Profiling: To identify the computation-intensive and resourceconsuming
functions, we leverage a profiler to construct the
cost model under execution settings. The profiler generates
a set of executions, and for each execution a profile tree.
With a tree-based analysis, a configuration file is generated
to record the functions whose execution time cost exceeds
the given time threshold.
Code Analysis: We then decide which functions can be
migrated, from the profiling results. Since JavaScript is a
dynamic language, we apply pointer analysis[2] to elaborate
the functions that might rely on browser-specific native
APIs and objects, or violate timer constraints. Nested migration
and eval are forbidden in current prototype. Code
analysis also extracts the context variables for the functions
to be migrated.
Migrator: The migrator is responsible to send the migrated
codes to cloud and synchronizes the application contexts. It
rewrites the migrated codes on device, by pointing to another
instance without modification of original running one.
We employ a mapping table to assist bi-directional synchronization
of functions and corresponding contexts.
4. Current Implementation and Evaluation
We have a prototype implementation of our framework1. The
framework is totally written in standard JavaScript language,
whereby it can be simply loaded into most currently popular
mobile Web browsers (including Safari, FireFox and
Chrome). The cloud-side JavaScript engine employs Google
Chrome V8.We take the Nginx2 HTTP server as a proxy for
the network connections.
We have also made series of experiments for evaluation.
The test suites include two Mozilla JavaScript performance
benchmarks3: Dromaeo and V8, and a typical computationintensive
application (the Gobang game), all of which are
conducted over several combinations of various mobile devices
platforms including Android smartphones/tablets and
Apple iPhone/iPad4. The experimental analysis shows that
our framework can achieve up to about 10x speedup on average,
which efficiently improves the performance for mobile
applications.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant No. 61003010, the High-
Tech Research and Development Program of China (Grant
No. 2012AA010107) and the NCET.
References
[1] A. Feldthaus, T. D. Millstein, A. Møller, M. Sch¨afer, and F. Tip.
Tool-supported refactoring for javascript. In C. V. Lopes and
K. Fisher, editors, Proceedings of the 26th Annual ACM SIGPLAN
Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems,
Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA 2011, part of SPLASH
2011, pages 119–138, Portland, OR, USA, 2011. ACM.
[2] G. Richards, A. Gal, B. Eich, and J. Vitek. Automated construction
of javascript benchmarks. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual
ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented Programming,
Systems, Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA 2011,
part of SPLASH 2011, pages 677–694, Portland, OR, USA,
2011. ACM.
[3] E. Tilevich and Y. Smaragdakis. J-orchestra: Automatic java
application partitioning. In B. Magnusson, editor, Proceedings
of 16th European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming(
ECOOP 2002), volume 2374 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 178–204. Springer, 2002.
1 Available download at https://github.com/wangxd18/extremejs
2 http://nginx.org
3 http://www.dromaeo.com
4 The experiment data analysis report can be found at
https://github.com/wangxd18/extremejs
84