Mobile learning with a mobile game: design and
motivational effects
Gerhard Schwabe & Christoph Go¨ th
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Abstract Mobile technologies offer the opportunity to embed learning in a natural environment. This
paper describes the design of the MobileGame prototype, exploring the opportunities to
support learning through an orientation game in a university setting. The paper first introduces
the scenario and then describes the general architecture of the prototype. The main
part of the paper focuses on the evaluation of design issues and the effects observed in two
trials. Design issues include: Supporting work on the move poses difficult interface questions,
the accuracy of current outdoor, and indoor positioning systems is still problematic and
the game requires near real-time response time. The evaluation of the effects shows that
features such as ‘map-navigation’ and ‘hunting and hiding’ lead to excitement and fun. The
participants immerse into a mixed reality that augments both physical and social space. The
game success is based on the motivating design of the game itself. The paper concludes with
open issues for future research, especially with the need to thoroughly evaluate the learning
benefits.
Keywords computer supported cooperative learning, computer supported cooperative play, E-learning,
mobile & wireless games, mobile learning, positioning systems
Introduction
Currently, there is a growing amount of research
concerned with applying mobile technology to learning.
This research can be technology driven, such as
the idea to broadcast a lecture on the cellphone
(Lehner & No¨sekabel 2003) or it can be pedagogically
driven, such supporting students’ field data collection
with mobile devices (Roschelle 2003). Sharples et al.
(2002) point out that there may be a particular opportunity
for mobile learning outside the traditional
formal learning settings. The objective of the Mobilearn
project (www.mobilearn.org) is to explore the
potential and the architectures of mobile learning both
in formal and informal learning settings. Specifically,
there are three application scenarios:
1. Health,
2. Museum,
3. Executive education.
The work presented here grew out of the executive
education scenario. For executive students as for all
other students it is a particular challenge to get acquainted
with the university as a learning environment
in order to make best use of its resources as fast as
possible. This includes team building with fellow
students. Our idea for supporting their initial learning
is based on the concept of game learning.
This paper has two objectives:
1. To discuss design issues of a mobile game
system with a focus on issues specific for mobile
Correspondence: Gerhard Schwabe, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
Email: schwabe@ifi.unizh.ch
Accepted: 14 March 2005
204 r Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted learning 21, pp204–216
Original article
learning and the motivational value added by mobile
games.
2. To present data on the effects of a mobile game on
participant motivation and on the features causing
those effects. This data focuses on motivational
effects (fun, excitement etc.).
The next section will review the related literature. The
third section will introduce the mobile game learning
scenario and the mobile game system. The fourth
section will introduce the general research design. The
fifth section presents the results of two trials. The sixth
section discusses technical design issues and the section
after that the effects observed in a user trial. The
last section closes the paper with some conclusions
and an outlook to further research.
Literature review
Computer science, information systems, and educational
research contribute to knowledge on mobile
learning games. As is typical for information systems
research, this paper strives to discuss these areas in an
integrated way, but because of space limitation the
literature review focuses on the educational aspects.
Lepper and Malone (1987) propose a relationship
between learning and intrinsic motivation. Their research
is based on an investigation of students who
played computer games. They identify seven key
factors for creating an intrinsically motivating instructional
environment: challenge, curiosity, control,
fantasy, cooperation, competition, and recognition. In
a set of experiments, Lepper and Cordova (1992) show
that computer games raise the efficiency of learning if
they increase the intrinsic motivation and link the
goals ‘winning the game’ and ‘learning the material’.
In these games, mathematical problem solving is
embedded in an artificial game context. With the new
mobile technology it is now possible to situate problems
in their natural context without losing the motivational
benefits of games.
How do computer games engage players? Prensky
(2001) proposes that six structural elements characterise
games. There are:
1. rules, that organize the game,
2. goals and objectives, the players strive to achieve,
3. outcome and feedback, which measure the progress
against the goals,
4. conflict, competition, challenge, and opposition
leading to players’ excitement,
5. interaction, the social aspect in the game, and
6. the representation or story exaggerating interesting
aspects of reality.
These elements need to be carefully designed and
combined to create a fun and engaging game. We will
use those factors to discuss design issues and the effects
of the MobileGame.
In a thorough literature review on game-based
learning, Mitchell and Savill-Smith (2004) show that
these elements can be used to analyse games For example,
games for teaching basic skills, like reading
and foreign languages (see Schwartz 1988 or Herselman
1999), teaching society skills, like self-efficacy in
HIV/AIDS prevention (Thomas et al. 1997), and social
learning such as encouraging successful dialogue
(Ravenscroft & Matheson 2002). It should be possible
to use these elements to carefully design and analyse
mobile games, but so far this has not been done yet.
There are already a few mobile systems that integrate
playing and learning, such as the Cooties Game
or Geney (Savill-Smith & Kent 2003) or Savannah
(Facer et al. 2004). They focus on role-play or simulation.
Prototypes and commercial products of location-
based games in a real life environment, like
CYSMN (Benford et al. 2003), Pirates (Bjo¨rk et al.
2001) or Mogi (Hall 2001), show that people like to
play with the new options, but these games focus
purely on entertainment.
With mobile game learning still in its infancy a
deeper understanding of its design principles as well
as of arising opportunities and limitations is paramount.
We therefore started to develop the locationbased
learning game MobileGame in 2002 (Go¨th
2003).
The mobile learning scenario and system
This chapter introduces the MobileGame through a
usage scenario and then briefly describes the system
architecture. The usage scenario is needed to understand
the effects, and the system architecture is needed
as a basis for the discussion of design issues.
Mobile learning with a mobile game 205
& Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21, pp204–216
Mobile learning scenario
The MobileGame is used to support the orientation
days at a university. The traditional orientation rally is
electronically supplemented with handheld devices.
The orientation rally is a fun event intended to get to
know the university and its surroundings. Therefore,
the rally will lead all participants through a parcours
with several tasks to carry out at certain spots. The
students play individually or in small groups (one to
three persons) against other individuals/groups.1 Each
group receives a handheld computer.
During the orientation rally, each group gets different
tasks referring to significant places, people and
events. The handheld device shows the current position
of the group on the digital map of the university.
When the group enters a building the outdoor map
switches to an indoor map of the building the group
just entered. The whole rally is structured as a cooperative
and competitive game. Competition is based
on hunting rules: Each group tries to catch another
group and, equally, is hunted by a third group.2 The
handheld device shows each group where its hunter
and its prey are located. Cooperation rules force group
members to meet members from other groups as well
as teachers and to exchange information with them –
again they are supported with location-based information
on their displays. The tasks given to them
provide them with basic information on University
life. There are the following types of tasks:
 Significant place tasks: The students have to find
important places such as the library, the cafeteria or
the laboratories. At each location, they have to
perform a typical task (find a book, have lunch,
etc.). The specific tasks are context-dependent (they
depend not only on the location, but also on the time
of the day or they build on the activity of some
previous group). The task execution is supported by
the handheld device (e.g. serving as a frontend to
the library information system or providing them
with needed information).
 Significant people tasks: The students have to find
important people of the university and have to interview
them on their activities (the president, the
study coordinator, the caretaker . . . These people
either participate in the game or are played by other
students). If those people are typically mobile they
can be located by a mobile device.
 Significant event tasks: The significant events can
be scheduled or come as surprise. Scheduled events
include introductory lectures and courses. Here,
tasks relate to the organization of studies (e.g. set up
a course schedule or how to find important information)
and some initial content. Unscheduled
events include ‘spontaneous’ welcome parties by
student groups, but also the signup of each group
member to important University services (e.g.
computer account, library card).
Each task requires the group to answer one or two
simple questions displayed on the handheld device.
For example, one task might be to find the cafeteria.
There they get the question ‘What is the price of an
apple pie?’. They won’t get the next task until the
correct answer is given.
In addition to the game, the students can annotate
real objects with virtual ‘post-it’s’. Other groups can
read these short messages and answer with their own
post-it’s.
Mobile game system
The scenario describes a synchronous collaboration
between the people. Thus, the architecture of the
mobile game prototype is derived from a generic architecture
for synchronous collaboration (Schu¨mmer
& Sackmann 2001; a more detailed discussion can be
found in Go¨th et al. 2004).
The architecture provides clients with their own
private state of the ongoing game: All relevant data are
stored on the client side so the player can act even if
there is no connection to the server available, e.g.
when playing in an offline area. The server works as
the central coordination point for the whole game. Any
changes in the game are transferred to the server
which distributes the data to all clients.
The architecture integrates three components: the
mobile client on the PDA,3 the web client for a
browser, and the server. PDA and server communicate
1In order to simplify the text, this scenario assumes that a there is a group
of players.
2The didactic reason for hunting rules is to keep the groups moving. Of
course there need to be hunting free areas and times, e.g. during courses. 3PDA: Personal digital assistant: A small handheld computer.
206 G. Schwabe & C. Go¨ th
& Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21, pp204–216
over a Wireless LAN (WLAN). The web client exchanges
data with the server over HTTP. The positioning
information is provided by the Ekahau
positioning engine. This engine calculates the position
of each client from the strengths of the WLAN-signals
it receives from several WLAN base stations. The
accuracy is from one to three meters, if the Ekahau
client can ‘hear’ four access points. The Mobile Game
prototype can also use GPS for positioning information.
However this positioning information is too inaccurate
and only works outside buildings.
Research design and framework
The overall design of the MobileGame research follows
the pilot study research approach (Schwabe &
Krcmar 2000). The basic idea is to develop sociotechnical
innovations in close collaboration with the
field site and to iterate between development and
evaluation activities. Sharples et al. (2002b) adapted
these ideas and applied them to the educational area.
Both approaches leave the starting point of the development
activities somewhat vague. While it is
possible to gather requirements to support an established
(educational) activity, it is difficult to gather
those requirements for a radically new activity. It was,
therefore, decided to use a scenario as a starting point
(for scenario-based design see Carrol 1995). This
scenario was described in third section. Such a scenario
should be coherent enough to allow a shared
understanding and to guide the development process.
It should also be general and colourful enough to allow
the developers to creatively interpret and advance
the scenario. The basic design and architecture of the
MobileGame is described in fifth section. The main
objective of the evaluation was to inform design and to
understand the educational value of the game as an
example of mobile learning.
As many components of the MobileGame are
leading edge technology we have evaluated the system
in several steps: We based our evaluation on Taylor’s
(2003) recommendation. In the context of the Mobilearn
project (www.mobilearn.org), she proposes to
first test the usability of the technology and in a second
step the pedagogy. After each step, the software is
adapted to the newly surfacing requirements. The first
test of October 2003 focused on the usability and only
offered a few insights into pedagogic questions. After
this test, we noticed how large the step is from a basically
usable software to a system that allows a
thorough evaluation of its pedagogy and its pedagogic
value. It appeared not advisable to leave the development
of the software without guidance for such a
long time, as some usability questions were (also)
open. We then decided to split the future development
and evaluation process into two parts: First, we focused
on the motivational aspects of the game and its
relationship to the usability of the system. Second we
will include the content and systematically test the
effects on learning. This final test of the learning
benefits is still outstanding. In retrospect, this two-step
approach turned out to be very helpful: although we
did not focus on content issues we now know much
better how to prepare appropriate content than before.
Method of evaluation of the first trial
The first version of the software was evaluated in a
user test at the University of Koblenz in October 2003.
The test was part of a presentation day by the faculty
of computer sciences. The first evaluation only tested
the technology in a very crude game: we hid a PDA in
a room of a university building and asked seven interested
visitors (mostly students) to find it with the
help of the game. Then they completed a short questionnaire
concerning their experience. In the first
section participants evaluated technical aspects of the
game and in the second section the participants provided
feedback regarding the game. The complete
questionnaire is available in the Internet4 or by contacting
the authors. Additionally the participants were
observed during the game.
Method of the evaluation of the second trial
The second evaluation of the MobileGame was located
at the Koblenz Campus of the University of
Koblenz-Landau in Germany. The location was chosen
because Koblenz as a partner of the Mobilearn
project has a campuswide wireless LAN and both
authors have very good knowledge of the campus (one
used to study there and the other was a professor
there). The game covered two office buildings, the
central campus facilities (cafeteria, lecture halls, li-
4http://www.ifi.unizh.ch/im/imrg/index.php?id=194
Mobile learning with a mobile game 207
& Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21, pp204–216
brary) and the space in between, all in all an area of
about 150 000m2.
Participants
A total of 22 students volunteered to participate in one
of the two games (one with 13 participants and the
other with nine). Eighteen participants played the
game on their own and each participant was equipped
with their own device. Four participants played the
game with a partner and they shared one device. The
participants were videotaped while playing the game.
Six participants were in their first year, nine participants
were in the second year and four participants
were in the third year or above. They were aged between
19 and 25 years old (average age 21.6 years).
There were 17 male students and five female and most
of them considered themselves experienced computer
users.
Procedure
The students were given 10 tasks, each consisting of a
location they had to find and a location related question.
The question was answered by filling in a multiple-
choice question or using sliders to specify a
number. The task was given to each student (specifically:
to each PDA) in a random order. The 10 questions
are as follows:
1. What is the first word on page 396 in the book
with the code INF/Wi 1999–93? (Multiple
Choice)
2. What is the number of the room of Prof. Ebert?
(Slider)
3. What is in this room? (Multiple Choice)
4. How many secretaries work for the institute of IS
research (Multiple Choice)
5. How many computers are in this room? (Slider)
6. When does this office close on Tuesday? (Multiple
Choice)
7. What is the correct link to the web form for getting
a network access? (Multiple Choice)
8. In this room you can return your re-registration.
What is the number of the room? (Slider)
9. What is the Menu 1 on Friday in the cafeteria?
(Multiple Choice)
10. How many copy machines are located on this
floor? (Slider)
Before the game, the students were given a short
training session with the PDA. They also received a
short printed information document. One game lasted
approximately 40min, the other approximately
30 min. In this time, the students had the opportunity
to answer the questions and to catch other groups. At
the end of each game, each player was given a questionnaire.
The questionnaire contained 12 questions
that can be clustered into four sections: the first section
asked the students how satisfied they were with their
introduction to the game; the second section collected
data on the motivational aspects of the game; the third
section focused on the usability of individual functions
and the final section collected data about the users.
The completed questionnaire is available in the Internet
5 or by contacting the authors.
Discussion framework
The MobileGame can be described in terms of Prensky’s
six structural elements. The scenario describes
the global rules. The players have the goal to solve the
tasks (and ultimately learn). The real time technique
gives you direct feedback on the current status in the
game and on the outcome achieved so far. Conflicts
and competition are realised through the opportunity
to gain points (by solving tasks or catching others). By
playing in groups there is interaction in the game. This
effect is additionally supported by the chat function.
The representation is realized through the orientation
on the digital map and the augmentation of the reality
with digital objects (e.g. the task or the virtual postits).
These structural elements characterised our game
and should engage the player.
Results
Results of the first trial
This section contains the major results of the first trial.
This trial focused on the technology of the first prototype.
The test persons have to rate seven technical
issues of the game and the general impression. The
scale ranged between 05unserviceable over 35acceptable
to 55excellent (Table 1).
5http://www.ifi.unizh.ch/im/imrg/index.php?id=194
208 G. Schwabe & C. Go¨ th
& Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21, pp204–216
Screen size and accuracy of the position scored
least. A number of participants commented that they
liked the idea but would have liked a better technical
realisation of the game. They would have liked to have
a zoom; auto-scroll and improve the update time of the
client. These features were built into the system for the
second trial.
Results of the second trial
This section contains the major findings from the
second trial. Since the experiment was designed to test
the motivational aspects of the game we will present
most data on this issue.
We asked the participants whether it was fun to play
the game. A large majority of students (17 of the 22)
indicated that they liked it and would play it again any
time. Five participants liked it, but thought playing it
once was enough. Nobody chose the options ‘It was
ok’, ‘No, but it could be fun if some details were
changed’ or ‘No, it was a waste of time’. Positive
(sometimes even enthusiastic) comments in the open
questions supports these findings. So the game is entertaining
and students like to play it.
Afterwards we asked, which elements of the game
the student liked best. Each of the 22 students were
allowed a maximum of two choices. Two students had
to be taken out of the evaluation because they had
selected more than two choices. However, this does
not change the overall picture as these two had similar
preferences as the others. Nine students selected
‘Hunting and hiding’, seven ‘Orientation with the
map’ and six ‘Playing as a group experience.’ ‘Solving
the tasks’ and ‘Technical aspects of the game’ were
selected by five participants, and four chose ‘Own
position on the map’. Only one students selected
‘Learn something about the university’, ‘Collection of
game points’, and ‘Orientation on maps by icon links’.
Each participant was asked to rate how often he
used key features of the game. They could respond
15not at all, 25rarely, 35normal, 45often, and
55very often (Table 2).
‘Orientation on map’ was used most often. In response
to the open questions, many students asked for
the map to be simplified. As we used architects’ maps
of the building, they included irrelevant information
(such as numbers or outdated plans for furniture).
They wanted this information to be replaced by relevant
information, such as more information concerning
other players and the location they were
currently at (e.g. the name of the building) and their
achievements in the game in comparison with others
(achievements5correctly answered questions). However,
there were quite a few students who were happy
with the map as it was.
The frequency of looking up question was rated
‘normal’ or ‘often’ by the majority of the participants.
There were a lot of positive comments concerning the
multiple-choice questions; the comments on the sliderbased
questions were mixed. The tasks were presented
in a random order. Ten participants rated that the order
of the tasks was ‘very good’, 12 rated it as ‘good’, but
some more intelligence in the ordering would be desirable’
(nobody chose ‘Useless). The uncoordinated
distribution of tasks was very demotivating’).
The use of the catching function varied widely. In
the open comment questions quite a few students reported
difficulties in handling this function, mainly
because of difficulties with imprecise navigation and a
somewhat confusing interface. Chat was rarely or not
at all used by most participants.
Only one of the 22 participants agreed with that
opinion ‘that the game could have been played without
a PDA’) and even s/he was unsure as s/he made two
Table 1. Rating of the technical aspects of MobileGame
M SD
Size of screen to read while walking 2.9 1.1
Weight while carrying in hand 3.9 1.1
Size of device to hold in hand 4.0 1.2
Display of maps 3.3 1.1
Handling of software 3.3 0.9
Accuracy of display of own position 1.9 1.1
Input of text with pen 3.6 0.8
General impression of functions 3.7 1.4
Table 2. Usage of key game features
M SD
1. Orientation on map 4.5 0.5
2. Look-up questions 3.7 0.8
3. Chat 2.0 0.8
4. Catch others 3.3 1.2
Mobile learning with a mobile game 209
& Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21, pp204–216
selections (the other was with the majority). The other
21 thought the electronic support increased the excitement
of the game; 10 of these thought the electronic
support significantly added value to the game
experience, 11 thought the electronic support increased
excitement but thought the technology was not
mature enough.
Table 3 shows the most important positive and negative
aspects of the game in the eyes of the participants.
6 Each student could select up to three positive
and three negative items. Many students selected only
one or two aspects.
The majority of the participants selected the navigation
as a major positive aspect. Half the participants
saw a considerable value added to a traditional guided
tour. A third selected the opportunity to individually
explore the university and to communicate over
messages with other groups. A small minority regarded
the interface as a major positive aspect and
nobody selected the s/he learned about the university.
The four most frequently selected negative aspects
are related to the interface design (each selected by a
third of the participants): imprecise display of the
position, delay of position tracking information, difficulties
in typing text, and difficulties in reading the
display in unfavourable conditions. Only a small majority
selected the control of the game flow, difficulties
in using the PDA when moving or keeping an overview
over different maps.
Technical design issues for the MobileGame
prototype
An appropriate game design cannot be reduced to individual
features. Rather, general technical design
issues need to be solved and an appropriate infrastructure
set up. This section discusses four key
technical design issues: Accuracy of positioning, play
on the move, offline areas and response time, and interface
design.
Accuracy of positioning
Other mobile games like ‘Can you see me now?’
(Benford et al. 2003) already reported problems with
inaccurate position information, particularly with
GPS. Our prototype uses WLAN for positioning with a
resulting accuracy of three to five meters. An accurate
location of the player is required to solve the task, to
hunt other groups and to orient on the digital maps.
The players in the first trial told us that the accuracy
was quite good as long they only needed to know their
approximate position. As soon as they had to know the
exact position of an object the accuracy was not sufficient.
They had to search in up to three rooms to find
the hidden PDA in the first trial and the participants
reported difficulties catching and solving location-
Table 3. Most important positive and negative aspects of the game
Most important positive aspects (maximum three choices)
The dynamic position tracking on a map is a significant value added for an orientation game 17
The game is a considerable value added compared with a traditional guided tour 11
The opportunity to independently explore the university is a significant value added 8
The opportunity to send messages to another group is a significant value added for an orientation game 7
The clarity of the user interface helped to play 4
I got to know the university better through the game 0
Most important negative aspects (maximum three choices)
The display of the position on the map was so imprecise that the flow of the game and the motivation to
play has considerably suffered
9
The 3 s delay in the position tracking was very irritating for me 8
The difficult typing of text on a PDA has effectively hindered me to send messages or make annotations/notes 8
In unfavourable conditions (e.g. in the direct sun) the display on the screen could not be read 7
The control of the game software has interfered with the flow of the game and the motivation to play 2
I consider it extremely hindering that the PDA cannot be used when I am walking or running 2
I had great difficulties to keep an overview over different maps 2
PDA, personal digital assistant.
6The list was created on the basis of the results of the first trial.
210 G. Schwabe & C. Go¨ th
& Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21, pp204–216
dependent tasks in our second trial. In the second trial,
the low accuracy of the location information was reported
as the single most important negative aspect.
There were two parts to this problem: The low precision
of the location information and the representation
of this low precision on screen. The first issue
could be tackled through better infrastructure. The
second problem could be solved through better representations
of the imprecision of the location rather
than the jumping arrow provided by Ekahau position
engine.
Play on the move
In the first trial, even in straight corridors the participants
reported difficulties in moving and navigating at
the same time. If they wanted to check their current
position they had to stop and look at the PDA comparing
the map on the screen with their surroundings.
The size of the maps does not appear to be the major
problem, as they covered half the PDA screen and the
participants did not have problems reading when
standing. Rather, they did not succeed to synchronize
their heads to the movements of the device in the hand.
Furthermore the cognitive load of translating an abstract
two-dimensional map to into a three-dimensional
building was high.
In the MobileGame, the players have to locate their
position constantly, in order to locate their next task or
to hunt other groups. A constant stop-and-go hinders
the flow of the game. At least half the game players
complained about this problem during the first evaluation.
In the second trial the participants again reported
difficulties with the precision of position
information (see Table 3), but the majority did not
regard having to stand still while using the computer
as major negative aspect of the game.
Still, it would be useful to enable the players to play
when walking. One solution could be an audio interface,
which gives the user the needed location information
through headphones. Bjo¨rk et al. (2001)
have experimented with using audio for providing
status information in their game Pirates! However, the
information could often not be heard because the noise
level within the gaming area was too high. So therefore
transmission of information through transient
audio and persistent visualisation on the PDA screen
each have unique advantages and disadvantages.
Offline areas and response time
One of the players reported that updating their position
took too long. Their position was updated every 3 s,
but in this time the players could move five or more
meters. Frequent updating of position is one most
important requirements of mobile games. Mostly, you
do not have an area-wideWLAN, so the mobile clients
are not always connected to the server. But the players
want a near real-time reaction of the client, e.g. if they
are solving tasks, hunt other groups, chat with others,
or just walk across the campus and use the digital map
for orientation. Game objects, which are changing all
the time, like the position of the players, have to be
updated by the client as fast as possible. This means,
the mobile game has to have both a good caching algorithm,
and an efficient data transmission strategy.
In our prototype all static information, such as the
game maps, were stored on the PDA. Only the dynamic
information, such as a new position or a new
task, were transmitted. The PDA receives all the information
from the server that was needed for offline
work, like the answer of the current task, so that the
players could interact even if they were in an area
without WLAN. Additionally, they received information
concerning their network status and the
status of other players they wanted to interact with.
Interface Design
Besides response time, the user interface was the most
important design issue of the MobileGame. The interface
enables the players to use the game features,
enables a group to interact with the system over one
device and communicate with other groups.
Figure 1 shows the old interface and the new one,
which has been implemented after the test. The first
interface used drop-down menus like desktop programs.
The basic idea was that the players needed a
‘tool’ (Zu¨llighoven et al. 1998) that they could use to
call functions in a random order. Observation of the
players showed that navigation with the drop-down
menu and using the pen of the PDA was not really
intuitive. The use of the PDA was much more like the
use of an ‘automat’: A player prefers easy access to a
service to the freedom of using the system in an innovative
way. So we redesigned the user interface and
substituted the old menu with a button bar. Now all
Mobile learning with a mobile game 211
& Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21, pp204–216
functions can be reached by one or two clicks.We also
used symbols instead of text because they are smaller
than text and the users understand symbols much
better.
One remaining problem is the interface for answering
the open questions. They offer the game designer
a broad range of possible tasks. However, the
users have to write down the answer with the pen and a
little virtual keyboard on the PDA, which is difficult to
use. Multiple-choice questions restrict the game design,
but users can answer with a simple click. In the
tested version we supported open questions, multiplechoice
questions and questions with sliders for numeric
input. We think an audio interface could help
here too. A high-tech approach would translate audio
input into text input; in a simple approach the players
just communicate with a human tutor synchronously
or asynchronously (voice-mails).
Discussion of the effects
The game was thought to be fun by most of the
players. Thus we can conclude from the experiment
that this type of game can engage participants. Prensky’s
structural game characteristics will be used to
discuss what features of the game contributed to engaging
the participants. This discussion includes implications
for designing mobile learning games.
Conflict, competition, challenge, opposition
There were two features in the game which were could
be described as competitive. They were hunting other
players and answering the highest number of questions.
Almost half of the students selected ‘Hunting
and hiding’ as the most interesting feature in the game,
which was all the more interesting because there were
several complaints in the open section of the questionnaire
about this feature: The latency of the positioning
software was too long and the interface was
regarded to be somewhat confusing: It was not always
clear to everybody whom they were hunting and
whom they were running away from. On the other
hand competing for points answering question was not
seen as an important feature of the game. There are
two possible interpretations for this evaluation: As the
questions were not immediately relevant for the students
(they already knew the campus), they may have
had little interest to excel in answering them. Thus
these comments could be an artefact of the experimental
design. A second possible interpretation was
that players were having difficulty competing in two
tasks at the same time and chose to compete in the
game that provided the more immediate feedback (see
the discussion of real-time gaming). This interpretation
is grounded on the personal experiences of the
authors with similar conventional games: Participants
tend to specialize either on gaining points by hunting
or on gaining points by answering questions. If this is
the case the hunting feature may even become dysfunctional
for learning. A variant of the latter interpretation
is that one task is more exciting than the
other one.
In a learning environment, a careful design is needed
to balance the engagement for hunting with the
engagement for working on tasks. Possible solutions
are:
Fig. 1 The new and the old user interface.
212 G. Schwabe & C. Go¨ th
& Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21, pp204–216
1. Make the competition for points more visible:
currently the hunting feature is visibly dominant as
players always see their competitors on the map. A
similarly visible game task point counter could
balance that dominance.
2. Make the catching itself a learning experience: If
hunters do not only receive points from their preys
but rather an explanation of some task solutions,
both preys and hunters would learn.
3. Turn of hunting for part of the game: If the hunting
is turned off for some time or some regions the
players automatically get exposed only to the
competition on tasks.
In any case, the hunting is a surprisingly useful feature
to keep participants interested and moving.
Outcome and feedback
The increased excitement has the potential to support
students’ learning. The shared experience can also
help to achieve ‘soft’ learning goals such as team
building. The task-oriented features and its accompanying
content have to ensure that the ‘hard’ learning
goals are achieved. However, the task-oriented features
of the game have not (yet) been systematically
designed and as the participants were not the final
target group (i.e. new students to the university), it is
not surprising that the task-oriented features received
only a medium rating: Five students liked the taskoriented
features of the game best. But only one person
thought that the most important feature of the
game was that s/he learned something about the university
and as nobody claimed that s/he got to know
the university better through the game, even this
evaluation is questionable. As the participating students
were not new to the university, most of the
presented information was not new to them.
The provision of immediate feedback is a major
difference between an electronically supported game
compared with a conventional game. The importance
of immediate feedback is supported by the participants’
clear statement that the game could not have
been replaced by a conventional game. The negative
aspects reported as most important (see Table 2) also
relate to limitations of the feedback mechanism. An
interesting improvement in outcome and feedback
would be automatically generated learning diaries that
allow the players to reflect on their learning.
Goals and objectives
The MobileGame has primary and secondary goals
and objectives. The primary goal of the MobileGame
was to advance learning: Newcomers to the university
would be able to orient on campus, getting to know
significant places, events and people. For this purpose,
a set of tasks was given to each student. The secondary
goal of the game was to gain as many points as possible
(through answering questions and catching others).
As discussed above the set-up of the experiment
did not allow us to analyse whether the primary goal
was achieved. Therefore this section will focus on the
secondary goals, i.e. on design of the tasks required to
gain points.
As discussed above, the mobile game was successful
in providing good tasks. The design of the
tasks was difficult: The questions have to be sufficiently
difficult to challenge the participants, but they
should not take too long in order to keep the game
flowing. As any missed task is a missed learning opportunity,
the participants should be able to tackle
most tasks. On the other hand there have to be more
tasks than participating individuals/groups in order to
avoid the situation where two groups have the same
task at the same time. Together with the limitations
posed by technology (particularly a limited play
duration because of battery limitations) there was only
a relatively small design space for an appropriate
number of tasks.
The game presented the tasks to the participants in
random order and their feedback indicates that they
were happy with that. However the game area was
limited. In a larger area or in a game with more advanced
learning goals the designers are well advised to
allow for a more sophisticated ordering. Either participants
are allowed to chose any available question
according to their preference, or they should be presented
in a geographically or pedagogically meaningful
order.
In order to keep the complexity of the game design
low, most tasks were presented as multiple-choice
questions. Closed questions are typically less interesting
than open questions and seriously inhibit the
didactical design of the game. However, there are two
good reasons to stay with multiple choice: first, it is
still difficult to type in information with a PDA, particularly
when one is on the move or still exhausted by
prior movements. Some questions could be solved by
Mobile learning with a mobile game 213
& Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21, pp204–216
using a moving slider, which is a little more difficult
than using multiple choice but less difficult than text
input. There were significantly more negative comments
on this feature than on the multiple-choice
questions. Second, multiple-choice questions speed up
the game, as answers are given quickly and the participants
can then move on. In a competitive environment,
speed is a prerequisite to excitement.
Interaction
The MobileGame offers plenty of opportunities for
interaction. Six participants liked the group experience
most. The opportunities to directly interact with other
participants over the chat were rarely used, because
participants reported that typing on a PDA is too difficult.
Thus a future system may be well advised to
improve the chat input or to include other channels for
communication, e.g. a voice channel. The evaluation
of the ‘Can you see me know’-game (Flintham et al.
2003) shows how such a voice channel can also contribute
to the excitement of the game. However, the
high rating of group experience and the low level of
electronic interaction raises the question what led to
the positive group experience. One answer is intensive
discussions between groups. Non-verbal interaction
such as observing one another on screen or watching
others from a distance may have played an important
role.
Representation or story
The game and the learning environment were presented
to the players on a digital map. The students
also liked the navigation with the map (seven choices),
although latency and lack of precision of the navigation
software was a problem. The navigation features
were at the centre of the discussion for the students,
receiving the highest numbers of complaints and a
very high level of interest. This supports our observation
that a navigation system is a very powerful
tool for situation learning in a natural environment.
The game also included a simple electronic augmentation
of physical objects: A task/question was attached
to each object and only once a player comes
near to an objects (is within its ‘aura’), the electronic
attachment becomes visible to him.
We conclude from the three favourite features of the
game that the students liked the mixed reality experience
of the game. Mixed reality means that the
participants activities are partially represented in
physical space and partially in digital space and both
spaces stand in correlation to one another (as exemplified
by the orientation with a map). The MobileGame
allowed the participants to collectively
immerse in such a mixed reality. Furthermore, the
MobileGame contains new opportunities for social
interaction (e.g. chatting or catching) and they have to
adhere to new rules (i.e. the game rules). Thus, participants
were not only immersed in a augmented
physical environment, but, at the same time, they were
immersed into an augmented social environment.
This interpretation is supported by the fact that the
participants reported that weaknesses in the technology
reduced their experience. This immersion into a
mixed reality environment appears to be a major reason
why it is not the same to play the game without IT
support, i.e. why the students see a significant value
added in the game. Immersion is particularly interesting
if there is movement and action, both in augmented
physical and social space. The students appear
to be more willing to accept low performance in
augmented physical space (e.g. imprecise navigation)
than in augmented social space (e.g. for chatting): In
contrast to the group in the first evaluation, the lack of
usability of the PDA during walking or running did not
appear to be a major issue for participants in the
second evaluation. The participants disliked insufficient
support for collaborative features. Written
communication is difficult with the PDA. So there is
still a need for other communication channels.
Conclusions and outlook
The design and evaluation of the MobileGame is one
more case for the dual role of information technology
(Giddens 1986; DeSanctis & Poole 1994). Mobile
Technology enables immersion into a mixed reality
environment and more motivating learning experience.
However it also severely limits some activities.
For many purposes, mixed reality environments are
much more apt to augment learning than purely physical
or purely digital environments. However current
technology still has some serious limitations particularly
regarding the mobile user interface and the accuracy
of positioning systems.
Still, the current state of MobileGame already indicates
its potential to enhance learning: The partici-
214 G. Schwabe & C. Go¨ th
& Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21, pp204–216
pants enjoyed the game and most would have liked to
play it again. We have attributed this finding to their
exciting mixed reality experience. The game at least
moves them into a state where they are mentally ready
for learning, where they are in the right environment
for learning and where they also already experience
some socially oriented learning. We cannot yet support
our claim that the MobileGame will really enhance
‘hard learning’. The tested user group was
unsuited for this test. Furthermore, the tasks and the
accompanying content have not yet been carefully
designed. This will be our next objective. A further
challenge will be moving the concept of the Mobile-
Game and the prototype into new domains. We have
already run a very simple version of the game in the
Zurich Zoological museum and have given it to children.
Here we were able to use professionally prepared
content. However, the users still liked the gaming
features best. There appears to be something in gaming
that deeply touches people of all ages and can lead
through immersion to fun. We have demonstrated in
the MobileGame prototype, how one can embed
learning into this experience. If we can systematically
succeed in this, the classical dichotomy between fun
and learning may be closed. Then one case for the
value added of mobile learning is made.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Urs-Peter Ha¨ss for helping to
implement the game in his diploma thesis and as a
junior research assistant. Urs-Peter Ha¨ss also helped to
run the experiment in Koblenz and contributed to a
prior conference paper on early experiences. We also
acknowledge Dirk Frohberg’s contribution to this
publication: He designed the questionnaire and also
helped to run the experiment and collect the data in
Koblenz. The MobileGame has been developed in the
context of the EU 5th Framework project Mobilearn.
Our efforts have been funded by the Swiss research
authorities (BBW).
References
Benford S., Anastasi R., Flintham M., Drozd A., Crabtree A.,
Greenhalgh C., Tandavanitj N., Adams M. & Row-Farr J.
(2003) Coping with uncertainty in a location-based game.
IEEE Pervasive Computing Journal 2, 34–41.
Bjo¨rk S., Fals J., Hansson R. & Ljungstrand P. (2001) Pirates!
Using the physical world as a game board. Paper at
Interact, IFIP TC.13 Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction, July 9–13, Tokyo, Japan.
Carrol J. (1995) Scenario-Based Design: Envisioning Work
and Technology in System Development. John Wiley &
Sons, Indianapolis.
DeSanctis G. & Poole M. (1994) Capturing the complexity
in advanced technology use: adaptive structuration theory.
Organization Science 5, S. 121–S. 147.
Facer K., Joiner .R., Stanton D., Reid J., Hull R. & Kirk D.
(2004) Savannah: mobile gaming and learning? Journal
of Computer Assisted Learning 20, 399–409.
Flintham M., Benford S., Anastasi R., Hemmings T., Crabtree
A., Greenhalgh C., Tandavanitj I., Adams M. &
Row-Farr J. (2003) Where on-line meets on the streets:
experiences with mobile mixed reality games. Proceedings
of the Conference on Human factors in Computing
Systems, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, USA.
Giddens A. (1986) The Constitution of Society. University of
California Press, Berkeley.
Go¨th C. (2003) Prototypische Implementierung einer
mobilen Spielumgebung fu¨ r den PDA. Diploma Thesis
at the University of Koblenz-Landau, Koblenz,
Germany.
Go¨th C., Ha¨ss U.-P. & Schwabe G. (2004) Requirements for
mobile learning games shown on a mobile game prototype.
Proceedings of the MLearn2004 Conference,
Rome.
Hall J. (2001) Mogi: Second Generation Location-Based
Gaming. Available: http://www.thefeature.com/article?
articleid=100501&threshold=-1. Last access 06.12.2004
Herselman ME. (1999) South African resource-deprived
learners benefit from CALL through the medium of
computer games. Computer Assisted Language Learning
12, 197–218.
Lehner F., No¨sekabel H. & Bremen G. (2003) M-Learning
und M-Education – Mobile und drahtlose Anwendungen
im Unterricht, Working Paper, Universita¨t Regensburg.
Lepper M.R. & Cordova D.I. (1992) A desire to be taught:
instructional consequences of intrinsic motivation. Motivation
and Emotion 16, 187–208.
Malone T.W. & Lepper M.R. (1987) Making learning fun: a
taxonomic model of intrinsic motivations for learning. In
Aptitude, Learning, and Instruction: III. Conative and
Affective Process Analysis (eds R.E. Snow & M.J. Farr),
pp. 223–253. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Mitchell A. & Savill-Smith C. (2004) The Use of Computer
and Video Games for Learning. Learning and Skills
Development Agency, London.
Mobile learning with a mobile game 215
& Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21, pp204–216
Prensky M. (2001) Digital Game-Based Learning. McGraw-
Hill, New York.
Ravenscroft A. & Matheson MP. (2002) Developing
and evaluating dialogue games for collaborative
e-learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 18,
93–101.
Roschelle J. (2003) Keynote paper Unlocking the learning
value of wireless mobile devices. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning 19, S. 260–S. 272.
Savill-Smith C. & Kent P. (2003) The Use of Palmtop
Computers for Learning, A Review of the Literature.
LSDA, London.
Schu¨mmer J. & Sackmann C. (2001). In Synchrone
Softwarearchitekturen (eds G. Schwabe, N. Streiz
& R. Unland). CSCW-Kompendium, Springer,
Berlin.
Schwabe G. & Krcmar H. (2000) Piloting a sociotechnical
innovation. Proceedings of the 8th European Conference
on Information Systems ECIS 2000, Wirtschaftsuniversita
¨t Wien, pp. S. 132– S. 139.
Schwartz S. (1988) A comparison of componential and traditional
approaches to training reading skills. Applied
Cognitive Psychology 2, 189–201.
Sharples M., Corlett D. & Westmancott O. (2002) The design
and implementation of a mobile learning resource.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 6, 220–234.
Sharples M., Jefferey N., du Boulay J.B.H., Teather D.,
Teather B. & du Boulay G.H. (2002b) Socio-cognitive
engineering: a methodology for the design of humancentred
technology. European Journal of Operational
Research 136, 310–323.
Taylor J. (2003) A Task-Centred Approach to Evaluating a
Mobile Learning Environment for Pedagogical Soundness.
Presentation at the Mlearn, Birmingham.
Thomas R., Cahill J. & Santilli L. (1997) Using an interactive
computer game to increase skill and self-efficacy
regarding safer sex negotiation: field test results. Health
Education and Behavior 24, 71–86.
Zu¨llighoven H., Ba¨umer D. & Bleek W. (1998) Das objektorientierte
Konstruktionshandbuch. dpunkt, Heidelberg.
216 G. Schwabe & C. Go¨ th
& Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21, pp204–216