Vivo's all-new 'V9' AI-Powered FullView™ Display Smartphone is now available in International Markets
Enabling the Perfect Shot, Perfect View and an AI-Powered Experience Vivo Celebrated the V9 Launch in a Series of Remarkable Events

SHENZHEN, April 28, 2018 /PRNewswire/ --  Vivo V9 is now officially available in international markets including Russia, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and more. The launch of V9 was celebrated with a series of fun and remarkable events, with the aim of bringing local consumers, media and business partners first-hand experience of V9's AI power and impressive photography features. Following Vivo's recent announcements around 5G and In-Display Fingerprint Scanning Technologies, Vivo's V9 uses advanced machine learning to provide a unique AI-powered mobile experience that enhances multiple features such as AI Face Beauty and AI Smart Engine.

The Vivo V9's AI Face Beauty is trained using a comprehensive database of almost one million facial images. This allows the V9's AI to detect the age, sex, skin texture and skin tone of the subject as well as the lighting environment. It can then apply enhancements in line with the preferences of local users. Other AI photography features include the new AI Selfie Lighting, which algorithm transforms the original 2D photo into a 3D model to process the light authentically and artistically, helping users create their masterpieces.  

Beyond photography, the V9's AI also ensures the best performance by optimizing and supporting the phone's operations with the AI Smart Engine which prioritizes system resources according to user habits.

Vivo has improved on the previous generation's facial unlocking technology with AI Face Access, which detects the reflection of natural skin and the subtle movements of the face to further reduce the possibility of unlocking when shown photos or videos. The V9's AI Attention Sensing also recognizes when you're looking at the phones to keep disruptions to a minimum by automatically reducing the volume of message alerts, incoming calls and alarms.

Vivo V9 celebrated its launch at signature landmarks in different markets.

Vivo created a first in Indonesia by launching at the Borobudur Temple Compounds, an UNESCO World Heritage Site. Vivo V9 also launched in Malaysia's world-renowned Kuala Lumpur Convention Centre.

In other markets like Russia, India and Thailand, Vivo connected with local consumers through partnering with beloved celebrities such as famous Russian football players like Anton Miranchuk, superstars Aamir Khan in India and Bam Bam GOT7 in Thailand.

"V9 represents our understanding of consumer's need for their mobile camera to automatically create the 'perfect shot' in any scenario. We are excited to introduce the V9's AI power to more young consumers around the world, and connect with them through local activations that are relevant to their culture," Alex Feng, Senior Vice President of Vivo said. "With AI playing a key role, we are confident that we can inspire and empower more consumers globally to express themselves by making the 'perfect shot' easier than ever to take, while the FullViewTM display provides consumers with the 'perfect view' to experience their photographic moments of self-expression."

High-resolution event and product images of V9 launches are available at this link: https://edelmanftp.boxcn.net/v/vivov9

About Vivo

A global smartphone brand focused on introducing perfect sound quality and ultimate photography with cutting-edge technology, Vivo develops innovative and stylish products for young people. We now have over two hundred million users and are one of the preferred brands of young people around the world. As an Official Sponsor of the FIFA World Cup™, Vivo believes in the importance of encouraging young people to embrace self-expression and an energetic lifestyle.

More information about our innovative smartphones can be found at www.vivo.com.