Mobile game-based learning in secondary
education: engagement, motivation and
learning in a mobile city game
J. Huizenga,*W. Admiraal,* S. Akkerman† & G. ten Dam*
*Graduate School of Teaching and Learning of the University of Amsterdam, Spinozastraat, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
†IVLOS Institute of Education of the University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Abstract Using mobile games in education combines situated and active learning with fun in a potentially
excellent manner. The effects of a mobile city game called Frequency 1550, which was
developed by TheWaag Society to help pupils in their first year of secondary education playfully
acquire historical knowledge of medieval Amsterdam, were investigated in terms of pupil
engagement in the game, historical knowledge, and motivation for History in general and the
topic of the Middle Ages in particular. A quasi-experimental design was used with 458 pupils
from 20 classes from five schools. The pupils in 10 of the classes played the mobile history
game whereas the pupils in the other 10 classes received a regular, project-based lesson series.
The results showed those pupils who played the game to be engaged and to gain significantly
more knowledge about medieval Amsterdam than those pupils who received regular projectbased
instruction. No significant differences were found between the two groups with respect to
motivation for History or the MiddleAges. The impact of location-based technology and gamebased
learning on pupil knowledge and motivation are discussed along with suggestions for
future research.
Keywords engagement, game-based learning, learning effects, location-based technology, mobile History
game, motivation.
Introduction
While schools are aimed at the education of pupils and
qualification of pupils for the labour market, they are
not always successful today. In the school year 2005–
2006 in the Netherlands, for instance, about 19% of the
pupils in secondary education left school without a
diploma. The majority of the pupils dropping out of the
first classes of secondary education came from prevocational
education (OCW 2007). The pupil drop-out
issue is an issue, moreover, in not only the Netherlands
but also all other European countries (Jonassen &
Blondal 2005; Herweijer 2008) and the USA as indicated
by the many newsletters of the Association for
Supervision and Curriculum Development. It thus
appears that education is not meeting the needs of
certain pupils sufficiently. According to Prensky (2001)
and others (e.g. Beck &Wade 2006; Klopfer 2008), one
of the reasons for this failure is that a new generation of
pupils is largely being educated with old paradigms and
methods. The present generation of pupils is growing up
with information and communication technology (ICT)
embedded in their daily lives. Such pupils handle digital
information on a daily basis, are connected to each other
via mobile technologies, work interactively, often
perform several tasks more or less simultaneously and
Accepted: 20 February 2009
Correspondence: Jantina Huizenga, Graduate School of Teaching
and Learning, University of Amsterdam, Spinozastraat 55, 1018 HJ
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Email: j.c.huizenga@uva.nl
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2729.2009.00316.x
Original article
332 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Computer Assisted Learning (2009), 25, 332–344
play games to a greater extent than previous generations
(Beck & Wade 2006; OCW 2007). According to van
Eck (2006), the popularity of games together with
ongoing research on the power of digital game-based
learning, on the one hand, and increased disengagement
of the so-called ‘net generation’ or ‘digital natives’from
traditional instruction, on the other hand, are factors
which explain the widespread interest in game-based
learning. This interest in game-based learning holds not
only for digital natives, but also for a broad group of
pupils and researchers today as well as for teachers and
parents (Kirriemuir & McFarlane 2004; Sandfort et al.
2006). It is thus quite possible that game-based learning
may more adequately address the manner in which
youngsters learn nowadays and engage them more successfully
in meaningful learning than traditional learning
methods (Prensky 2001; Gee 2003; Shaffer 2006;
van Eck 2006). Although some studies report success in
learning with games with traditionally disengaged
groups of students (see, e.g. Squire 2004; Egenfeldt-
Nielsen 2005) and that using games in lessons is motivating
(see, e.g. Sandfort et al. 2006) the empirical basis
for claiming that game-based learning may more
adequately engage pupils is still rather thin and far from
conclusive.
Game-based learning
During the last 20 years, the importance of fostering
meaningful learning has been elaborated upon under
the general heading of situated and active learning
(Brown et al. 1989; Lave & Wenger 1991; Lombardi
2007). So-called mobile and location-based technologies
provide opportunities to embed learning in authentic
environments and thereby enhance engagement and
learning outside traditional formal educational settings.
With handhelds, it is possible to mix virtual data with
real-world data (i.e. locations and contexts) and thereby
connect a virtual world to real life (Klopfer & Squire
2008). Similarly, games can be played in the real world
with the support of such digital devices as Personal
Digital Assistants and cell phones, which make it possible
to create a fictional layer on top of a real world
context and thus an augmented reality. Location-based
augmented reality games, for instance, are played in
specific real-world locations which may include historical
or geographical sites. Along these lines, the MIT
Teacher Education Program created a game called
Environmental Detectives in which handheld computers
with a Global Positioning System (GPS) are used to
augment the experience of the user with additional text,
audio and video data (Klopfer et al. 2002). Under such
circumstances, the user experiences his or her environment
in a new way and situated, active learning is
stimulated. The context sensitivity of mobile devices
(i.e. their capacity to gather data which is unique to the
current time and location and may be either real or
simulated) is one of the properties – according to
Klopfer et al. – which makes such mobile devices so
well-suited for the support of learning activities. Four
other properties which are assumed to make such
mobile devices particularly useful for educational purposes
concern their portability, their social interactivity
as both face-to-face interaction and the exchange of
data between learners is made possible, their connectivity
and their individuality as the support for different
activities can be tailored to the needs of specific learners
(see Klopfer et al. 2002). Given all the possibilities
of game-based learning, the question which arises is
whether it actually lives up to all of the expectations
or not.
Research on mobile game-based learning tends to
focus on the motivational effects of the methods. One of
the main reasons for this is that when people play such
games, they are generally found to be very engaged in
the game: They are totally immersed in the game and
can play for hours on end with little or no awareness of
the more general world around them (Beck & Wade
2006; Shaffer 2006). Such a state of complete absorption
in a task is referred to as ‘flow’ (Csíkszentmihályi
1990). Flow theory is important for motivation in
instruction (Watson 2007). Having motivated learners is
what many teachers desire. In fact, a motivated learner
is easy to describe: enthusiastic, focused and engaged.A
motivated learner shows a clear interest in what he or
she is doing and enjoys what he or she is doing, tries
hard and persists over time (Garris et al. 2002). Many
studies of games and motivation are based upon the
motivationwork of Malone and Lepper (1987) who proposed
a link between motivation and intrinsic learning.
More specifically, seven factors which include both
individual and interpersonal factors have been postulated
to promote intrinsic motivation. The individual
factors are challenge, curiosity, control, fantasy, competition,
cooperation and recognition. According to many
authors, many of these factors are triggered by games
Mobile game-based learning in secondary education 333
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
(see, e.g. Prensky 2001; Garris et al. 2002; Egenfeldt-
Nielsen 2006).
In their evaluation of mobile game-based learning,
Schwabe and Göth (2005) indeed found that technology
enables immersion into a mixed reality and thus provides
highly motivating learning experiences. In their
words, the MobileGame they studied moved the pupils
‘into a state where they are mentally ready for learning
and where they are in the right environment for learning’
(p. 215). However, the authors also admit that they
cannot claim that the game actually enhanced pupil
learning. There is a need to more thoroughly evaluate
the cognitive benefits of mobile game-based learning
despite the fact that both the cognitive and motivational
effects of game-based learning have been previously
studied (see, e.g. Mitchell & Savill-Smith 2004; Hays
2005; Egenfeldt-Nielsen 2006; Fletcher&Tobias 2006;
de Freitas 2006; Gros 2007; Habgood 2007). While the
reviews conducted to date show a positive overall
picture, many of the relevant studies are nevertheless
methodologically flawed, rarely experimental and often
present contradictory results. According to de Freitas
(2006) in her review of the literature on game-based
learning, games and simulations certainly have substantial
potential for learning but certain challenges ‘in
terms of setting and assessing specified learning objectives’
(p. 58) in particular must be met in order to effectively
use the potential of learning from games and
simulations.
In the present study, the motivational and learning
effects of a mobile city game called Frequency 1550
were thus examined. Frequency 1550 can be considered
as a game, following the definition of Dempsey saying
that a game is ‘a set of activities involving one or more
players. It has goals, constraints, payoffs and consequences.
A game is rule-oriented and artificial in some
respects. Finally a game involves some aspects of competition,
even if that is competition with oneself’
(Dempsey et al. 1996, p. 2). Although the game Frequency
1550 has won an award as the world’s most
innovative e-learning application, the educational value
of the game has yet to be documented systematically.
The effects of the mobile game on pupil knowledge of
medieval Amsterdam and their motivation for the study
of History in general and the Middle Ages in particular
will therefore be examined in the present study in addition
to the engagement of the pupils while playing the
game.
The Frequency 1550 game
Introduction to the game
The Frequency 1550 game was developed by theWaag
Society, which is a Dutch ICT research foundation
working in the social and cultural domain. Frequency
1550 is a game about medieval Amsterdam to be played
during a single school day.At the start of the game day,
the pupils gather at the main location, namely theWaag
building or 15th century weighing house in the city of
Amsterdam. The pupils are introduced to the game, the
tasks, the tools to be used and the objective of the game:
To gain citizenship in the city of Amsterdam via attainment
of the required 366 points or ‘days of citizenship’
which represent the medieval year-and-a-day rule that
requires residence within the Amsterdam city walls for
this period of time to earn civil rights. Groups of four or
five pupils are formed, and the pupils are randomly
assigned the identity of a beggar or a merchant who have
different rights and a different status (i.e. order) in the
game. The part about earning citizenship and being in
an order is called the main storyline or the backstory.
With the help of the Internet, smart phones, videophones
and GPS technology, Amsterdam becomes a
medieval playground.
Group and team structure
Each group of four or five pupils is divided into a city
team (CT) consisting of two or three pupils who walk
through the city and a headquarter team (HQT) consisting
of the other two or three pupils who operate from
behind the computer in the main building. After the
lunch break, the teams switch places so that each pupil
has participated in both the CT and HQT at the end of
the day. The CT is assigned one of six areas (see below)
as the starting point for the conduct of small, locationbased
media tasks to explore, map and gain knowledge
of each of the areas and their associated themes. The CT
can view a map of medieval Amsterdam (Figure 1) on
their smart phones and zoom in on a particular part of
the map. The HQT can use two maps: one about medieval
Amsterdam and one about present Amsterdam;
both maps have coloured dots indicating the routes the
six CTs are walking. The HQT digitally follows the
route of the CT by means of GPS and guides them
towards and through the required learning tasks using
various sources of information, including the videos in
the game and Internet resources.
334 J. Huizenga et al.
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Six areas and associated themes
The old city of Amsterdam has been divided into six
areas in which six different themes from medieval times
are addressed. The six themes are: 1) labour in the area
called Lastage; 2) trade in the area called de Kade; 3)
religion in the area called de Twee Zijden; 4) rules and
government in the area called die Plaets; 5) knowledge
in the area called de Kloosters; and 6) defence in the
area called de Verdediging. Each theme is introduced
with the name of the area via an introductory video clip
displayed in a telephone message which is sent to the
pupils as if it came from the year 1550 as soon as they
enter a new area. Each clip presents words which can
help the group complete the assignments for the area;
the audio background presents the sounds of medieval
activities in the area (e.g. the sound of manual work,
sawing). After the presentation of keywords, the video
clip zooms in on a few pages from a diary. The diary for
the area Lastage reads as follows.
Tuesday. A few sisters’ dresses are worn out and I need
yarn. The best yarn can be found in Lastage because they
make rope out of yarn there. Lastage is a long walk from
the monastery because it is located outside the city wall.
As soon as you pass the city wall, you will hear hammering
in the distance where manual labour is conducted
(. . .) the area is being protected by the newdefence tower
which lies on the outer boundary of Lastage. It is situated
at the intersection of the water of the Amstel and the
water of the IJ.
In order to receive assignments, the CTs must try to find
a certain area, the so-called hidden location. Following
the diary pages, a closing text is presented by the main
narrator providing clues about the hidden location:
The hidden location can be found on the outskirts of
Lastage. It is situated at the intersection of the water of
the Amstel and the water of the IJ. The hidden location is
a tower on the east side of Lastage.
Assignments
As soon as the GPS data shows a CT has reached a particular
location, three video assignments in addition to
the introductory video are automatically sent from the
server in The Waag to the videophone. For each area,
there are three similar types of assignments: an orientation
assignment, an imagination assignment and a symbolic
assignment. Each assignment consists of three
parts and is concluded with a final multiple choice or
open-ended question which often requires the CT and
HQT to combine their knowledge to find the answer.
The orientation assignment includes texts and tasks
which are intended to trigger environmental awareness.
This may be done via the creation or selection of photos,
the answering of questions about the site.
The imagination assignment includes texts and a task
which are again intended to trigger not only environmental
awareness via the creation or selection of photos
and the answering of questions about the site but also
Fig 1 Map of medieval Amsterdam ©
Waag Society.
Mobile game-based learning in secondary education 335
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
the imagination of historical actions, events and the
work of historical characters. For this assignment, the
CTs are asked to act out particular idioms/sayings such
as ‘this is monks’ work’, which is the equivalent of ‘this
is sheer drudgery’in English and refers to the days when
monks meticulously copied books by hand. The acting
out of the sayings is videotaped, while the HQTs are
asked to find out what these sayings mean.
In the comprehensive assignment, the CTs are asked
to search for several details – such as a plaque with the
medieval name of the area – and take pictures of the
details while the HQTs are asked to select the correct
picture from various pictures on the Internet or somewhere
else. Similarly, the CTs may be asked to take a
picture of something such as a depiction of the emblem
for a guild while the HQTs have to find out more about
the guild itself.
Each group, consisting of a CT and a HQT, can gain
points which help them to win the game via the completion
of assignments. Each CTalso has to decide whether
to stay away from the other CTs or enter into a confrontation
in which their ‘order’ determines the winner with
merchants having a higher order than beggars. The
winning group receives points (i.e. days of citizenship)
from the losing group. Team members can also drop
virtual medieval rats (i.e. the equivalent of a virtual
bomb) on the other team which causes the screen of the
smart phone to go blank and thus disables the use of this
phone temporarily.
Completion of the game
At the end of the day, all of the pupils gather at the main
building where the HQTs are located. Each of the
groups is invited to briefly present some of their collected
media to the other groups. An educational staff
member of theWaag Society is also present to guide this
process and ask questions. Finally, every group is told
how many points they have earned and the group with
the highest score is announced. With 30 min of introduction,
a 1 h lunch break and almost 1 h of presentations
at the end of the day, 2 h are left of play in a CT and
2 h left to play in an HQT.
Method
Given that the aim of the present study was to enhance
insight into both the motivational and learning effects of
game-based learning, hypotheses regarding the motivation
and knowledge gains of the pupils in the different
research conditions were formulated first.
1 The motivation of the pupils playing the Frequency
1550 game for History in general and the topic of the
Middle Ages in particular will differ from that of the
pupils receiving the regular project-based lesson
series.
2 Those pupils playing the Frequency 1550 game will
show different knowledge gains with regard to medieval
Amsterdam than the pupils receiving the regular
project-based lesson series.
The aforementioned hypotheses were formulated nondirectional
as the literature did not provide conclusive
evidence regarding the effects of game-based learning.
Research by Clark and Feldon (2005) and Kanfer and
McCombs (2000) suggests that pupil interest in a topic,
their prior knowledge with regard to the topic and their
learning preferences (i.e. learning styles) may affect
their choices and persistence to learn a subject. Given
that the majority of the pupils dropping out of secondary
education are in pre-vocational secondary education
(OCW 2007), it may be that education is not appealing
enough for these pupils and that the Frequency 1550
game may work differently for pre-vocational pupils
than for other pupils. Two pupil characteristics, in particular,
may interact with the playing of the Frequency
1550 game, namely: the pupil’s prior History ability and
the pupil’s level of education – which can be understood
to reflect various aspects of general cognitive ability,
motivation and learning style. In keeping with the aforementioned,
the following two hypotheses were thus formulated.
3 Pupils with an initially low History ability will generally
attain different knowledge of medieval Amsterdam
results after playing the Frequency 1550 game
than after receipt of a regular project-based lesson
series.
4 Pupils from pre-vocational secondary education will
generally attain different knowledge of medieval
Amsterdam results after playing the Frequency 1550
game than after receipt of a project-based lesson
series.
As pupil engagement in a game is an important condition
for learning and having fun, we will measure their
level of engagement as well.
336 J. Huizenga et al.
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The regular project-based lesson series of two class
hours was designed by the researchers in strong cooperation
with five history teachers from the participating
schools. The content of the game Frequency 1550 has
been used in the design of the regular project-based
lesson series, which means that the content of both conditions
(games and lesson) was similar.We checked the
realisation of this design with teacher reports. However,
the instruction of the assignments, the pedagogy and the
time devoted to each topic are different between both
conditions as these are part of the educational design. In
the game condition, the instruction of the assignment is
more ‘game-like’and narrative-based, the pedagogy has
a focus on pupil-centred learning, and the time devoted
to each topic was 4 h maximum, including time to navigate
through the city, social talk and attempts to connect
with the headquarters.
Participants
The participants in the present study were pupils who
ranged in age from 12 to 16 years with the majority
having an age of 13 years. The pupils were all in the first
year of secondary education in the Netherlands: 14
classes with a mix of pre-vocational secondary education
pupils and 6 classes with a mix of upper general and
pre-university secondary education pupils. Of the 458
pupils, 232 played the Frequency 1550 game and 226
followed the regular project-based lesson series.
Ten of the classes played the mobile history game in
the last week of May and the first two weeks of June
2007. Seven of these classes were pre-vocational; the
other three were a mix of upper general and preuniversity
secondary education. The pupils in these
classes form the experimental group. The other 10 –
again seven pre-vocational and three upper general and
pre-university secondary education – classes followed
the regular project-based lesson series which was specifically
designed for this research during the same
period. The pupils in these classes form the control
group.
Measures
Engagement
Every CT went into Amsterdam with a guide who
observed the game, assisted with small technical issues
and saw to the pupils’ safety in the busy traffic of
Amsterdam. The observation forms included items on
just how often specific game activities occurred or how
actively pupils were involved in a certain game activity
(on a 5-point Likert scale with 1 indicating ‘not at all’
and 5 indicating ‘= very often/very strong’). Examples
are: ‘Howactively is theHQTinvolved in the conduct of
the assignment?’ and ‘How actively is the CT involved
in the exploration of the surroundings?’ At the Waag
building where the HQTs were located, the activities of
each team were also observed by a guide who helped the
HQTs with technical issues. In most cases, one guide
was observing and helping two HQTs. All of the guides
completed observation forms and, at the end of each
day, both the guides for the CTs and the HQTs came
together to orally report on the day. These guides were
staff members of Waag Society or volunteers from
outside Waag Society. Morover, the three researchers
made notes on the pupil engagement.
Motivation for History and the topic of
the Middle Ages
Motivation was measured using a 6-item questionnaire
similar to one available to measure motivation for Math
(Cito 1987). In fact, the word ‘Math’ was replaced by
‘History’ and an additional item was included to assess
the pupil’s motivation for the topic of the Middle Ages.
The questionnaire was administered directly before
(pre-test) and 1 week after (post-test) playing the Frequency
1550 game or attending the lesson series. The
questionnaire items were responded to along a 5-point
Likert scale with 1 indicating (almost) never and 5 indicating
(almost) always. Examples of the statements to
be rated are: ‘I like the subject of History’ and ‘I learn a
lot from the subject of History’. The homogeneity of
the questionnaire was found to be satisfactory with a
Cronbach’s a of 0.78 (pre-test) and 0.84 (post-test).
Motivation for the topic of Middle Ages was measured
using only the item: ‘I think the Middle Ages are
interesting’.
Knowledge of medieval Amsterdam
Historical knowledge of Amsterdam was measured
using three multiple-choice questions and two openended
questions for each of the six themes concerned
with medieval Amsterdam: a total of 30 questions.
However, none of the groups of pupils were found to
have played the Frequency 1550 game for all six themes
by the end of the game day. This meant that the test score
Mobile game-based learning in secondary education 337
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
for each pupil was corrected for the themes and assignments
a pupil completed. So, only the scores for those
questions for which the pupils had received the necessary
information were considered in the test score on
knowledge of medievalAmsterdam. The test items were
exactly the same for pupils for both groups (game and
lesson).
Background variables
The school administration provided us with information
on the age, gender and level of education for the pupils.
The teachers of the pupils estimated the pupils’ initial
History ability (knowledge or skills regarding the
subject of History) along a scale of 1 to 5 with higher
scores indicating greater ability. History abilitywas then
recoded as low, medium or high initial History ability.
Given that the playing of the Frequency 1550 game
draws upon collaborative learning, the pupils were
asked to respond to five statements indicating their attitudes
towards collaboration (a = 0.78). The questionnaire
used to do this was similar to the questionnaire
used to assess the pupils’ motivation for History in
general and the Middle Ages in particular; the same
5-point Likert scale was used to respond to the questions.
An example of an assessment statement is: ‘When
I collaborate, I understand things more quickly’. None
of the several existing questionnaires we reviewed were
found suitable to the group of students we were going to
work with; therefore, we made our own collaboration
scale.We formulated eight items on collaboration. After
a factor analysis, we selected those five items which
loaded on the factor as intended and showed sufficient
reliability.
Analyses
The oral reports provided by the guides at the end of the
Frequency 1550 game day were all transcribed. In a
grounded-theory approach, the transcriptions of the oral
reports, the observation notes from the researchers and
the notes of the guides from 110 observation forms were
used to inductively discern the theme engagement
(Strauss & Corbin 1998). Sentences with words which
indicate (dis)engagement [e.g. fun, concentration,
(de)motivation, enthusiasm, boredom, effort] were
marked and the frequencies of comments indicating
engagement or disengagement were then counted.
To assess the four hypotheses regarding the motivational
and learning effects of playing the game versus
following regular lessons, univariate analyses of covariance
were performed. For the first two hypotheses
regarding the pupils’ motivation and knowledge, the
independent variable was the intervention (Frequency
1550 game or regular project-based lesson series); the
dependent variables were motivation for History in
general and the topic of the Middle Ages in particular
(hypothesis 1), and knowledge of medieval Amsterdam
(hypothesis 2). Educational level (pre-vocational vs.
upper general secondary and pre-university education),
initial level of History ability (transformed into low,
medium or high), pre-test motivation for the subject of
History in general and the topic of the Middle Ages in
particular and attitude towards collaboration were
entered as covariates. For the hypotheses regarding the
interaction effects, the independent variables were
initial level of History ability, level of secondary education
being followed and intervention; the dependent
variable was knowledge of medieval Amsterdam; and
the covariates were pre-test motivation for the subject of
History in general and the MiddleAges in particular and
attitude towards collaboration.
Results
Engagement in the game Frequency 1550
The game was mostly played as planned, but with a few
exceptions. There was not much elaboration of backstory:
Pupils were often just told to gather as much
points as possible, with no reference to earning civil
rights. Moreover, pupils were not always informed
about their identities as beggar or merchant. This meant
that a certain competitive element of the game was
removed. In addition, the technology did not always
work as planned. On particularly the first three game
days, there were problems with the GPS which either
showed the wrong position for the pupils or no position
whatsoever. The sending of photographs and videos
took a very long time on some days, which prevented the
pupils from moving on to the next assignment. The
pupils could not, thus, progress in the game and therefore
completed fewer assignments than expected. These
technical problems might have negatively influenced the
engagement of the pupils. On about 50% of the 56 occasions
when the guides mentioned something negative
about the engagement of the pupils, the guide also mentioned
a technical problem. Examples of statements
where engagement was related to technical problems
338 J. Huizenga et al.
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
are: ‘media doesn’t arrive, causing a lot of delay leading
to demotivation’; ‘some problems starting up the technique,
they get impatient, start chasing each other and
playing around’; ‘technical problems tested pupils’
patience and diminished concentration/attention’; and
‘the ladies want to, but get demotivated by technical
problems’. The pupils were not always demotivated in
cases of technical problems and the guides sometimes
explicitly noted that the pupils were motivated despite
the occurrence of technical problems. There seem to be
differences in engagement between theHQTand theCT.
The HQT generally had to wait less than the CT, and
some of the guides mentioned that the pupils appeared to
like to be in the HQT more than the CT. This higher
engagement of the HQTs seemed to be related to the
many different tasks of the HQT and their overview of
the game play. This image of engagement derived from
the observation forms is supported by the oral reports
provided by the guides and researchers at the end of the
day.
The quantitative observation data obtained from the
guides showed the pupils to have a strongly active
engagement in the solution of assignments but a bit
more for the HQTs than for the CTs.
In general, most of the pupils appeared to like the
game and to be engaged by the game. Pupils who were
not engaged regularly showed off-task surfing for
YouTube videos or other things not relevant to the game
or the assignments. Illustrative of observations that
pupils were engaged is a teacher mentioning the fact
that he could not normally get his pupils to work and
that they now stayed focused for six hours, children
being too busy to act up, best friends now able to live
without each other for an entire day and some quiet
pupils suddenly taking charge of the phone.
Below, we present the results regarding the four
hypotheses we formulated. The means for the dependent
variables are presented in Table 1 along with the
numbers of participants in the analyses of covariance
we performed.
Motivation for History and the topic of
the Middle Ages
In our analysis of covariance no significant differences
were found between playing the game versus attending
regular lessons with respect to motivation for the subject
of History in general or the topic of the Middle Ages in
particular.As technical problems might have influenced
the motivational results, the analyses were repeated for
the data when split into days 1–3 and 4–10, but still no
significant differences were found for the game versus
regular instruction groups. Hypothesis 1, namely that
the motivation for History in general and the topic of the
Middle Ages in particular would differ for those pupils
playing the Frequency 1550 game versus those pupils
receiving a regular project-based lesson series, can thus
be rejected.
Knowledge of medieval Amsterdam
Asignificant effect of the intervention (playing the Frequency
1550 game vs. the receipt of a regular projectbased
lesson series) was found for knowledge of
medieval Amsterdam in the analyses of covariance
[F (1, 410) = 153.6; P  0.001]. The 211 pupils who
played the Frequency 1550 game generally attained
higher scores on the knowledge test (with 60% of the
questions answered correctly on average) than the 200
pupils who received regular project-based instruction
(with only 36% of the questions answered correctly on
average). Almost 28% of the variance in the scores on
the knowledge test was explained by the intervention,
and this can be judged to constitute a large effect (effect
size f = 0.62; see Cohen 1988).
Table 1. Mean scores on knowledge of medieval Amsterdam, motivation for the subject of History and motivation for the topic of the
Middle Ages for intervention and control group.
Frequency 1550 game Regular project-based lesson series
N Mean N Mean
Knowledge of medieval Amsterdam 211 60% 200 36%
Motivation for History subject 141 3.02 136 2.80
Motivation for topic of Middle Ages 139 2.80 134 2.52
Mobile game-based learning in secondary education 339
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
In light of the fact that the majority of pupils dropping
out of secondary education come from pre-vocational
education(OCW2007), we expected that the Frequency
1550 game might work differently for pre-vocational
pupils than for the pupils from upper general secondary/
pre-university education. The research of Clark and
Feldon (2005) and Kanfer and McCombs (2000) also
gave us reason to expect that a pupil’s initial History
ability and level of education might interact with the
learning effect. For this reason, the two variables which
indicate a pupil’s ability level – namely, their level of
education (pre-vocational vs. upper general secondary
or pre-university) and initial History ability (low,
medium, or high) were analysed in interaction with
intervention (game vs. regular project-based lesson
series). The analyses revealed still a significant main
effect of intervention and significant two-way interactions
of educational level with intervention and initial
History level with intervention. The results of the twoway
interactions are graphically presented in Figures 2
and 3.
Pupils from the higher educational level (i.e. upper
general secondary and pre-university education)
appeared to benefit more from playing the Frequency
1550 game than pupils from the lower educational level
(i.e. pre-vocational education) (see Figure 2). After
playing the Frequency 1550 game, those pupils in
pursuit of a higher level of education attained relatively
higher scores for knowledge of medieval Amsterdam
than pupils in pursuit of a lower level of education. Conversely,
after receipt of regular project-based instruction,
pupils with a lower educational level attained
Fig 2 Two-way interaction between intervention
(game vs. regular lesson) and
educational level (pre-vocational vs. upper
general secondary or pre-university).
Fig 3 Two-way interaction between intervention
(game vs. regular lesson) and initial
History ability (low, moderate, high).
340 J. Huizenga et al.
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
relatively higher scores on the test of knowledge of
medieval Amsterdam than pupils with a higher educational
level [F (1, 410) = 19.6; P  0.001].
From Figure 3, it can be seen that pupils with an initially
low History ability benefitted most from playing
the Frequency 1550 game; the difference between
playing the game versus attending a regular projectbased
lesson series is larger for this ability group than
for the other two ability groups [F (2, 410) = 3.3;
P = 0.04].
From Figures 2 and 3, it is clear that a large significant
effect of intervention in favour of playing the Frequency
1550 game still remains [F (1, 410) = 138.7;
P  0.001]. Some 26% of the total variance in the
scores on the knowledge of medieval Amsterdam test is
explained by intervention alone. The interaction effects
depicted in Figures 2 and 3 can be understood as small
effects and indeed explain only 5% and 2% of the variance
in the knowledge of medieval Amsterdam test
scores, respectively.
Discussion
The use of mobile games in education may be an excellent
way to combine situated and active learning with
fun. The learning potential of mobile and locationbased
technologies lies in the possibility to embed
learning in an authentic environment, enhance engagement
and foster learning outside traditional formal educational
settings. Although research on game-based
learning constitutes an expanding research domain,
claims that mobile games really enhance pupil learning
still lack solid empirical evidence (de Freitas 2006).
Despite the various studies conducted to date, there is
clearly a need for more thorough evaluation of the motivational
and learning effects of mobile game-based
learning. Experimental studies in which mobile gamebased
learning is compared to regular – possibly
project-based – learning are needed direly. In this
article, we have presented the results of an experimental
study involving the mobile city game called Frequency
1550 in which pupils in the first year of secondary education
can playfully acquire historical knowledge of
medieval Amsterdam. Pupil engagement in the game
was investigated in addition to the effects of playing the
game on the historical knowledge of the pupils and their
motivation for the subject of History in general and the
topic of the Middle Ages in particular when compared
to pupils receiving a regular project-based series of
lessons.
The results showed playing of the Frequency 1550
game to produce a clear learning effect in terms of
knowledge of medieval Amsterdam. Those pupils who
played the Frequency 1550 game generally attained
higher scores on the knowledge test when compared to
those pupils who received a series of regular projectbased
lessons. The pupils in the mobile game intervention
presumably gained greater knowledge of medieval
Amsterdam because the information was presented in a
more realistic, meaningful context and because the
pupils had to actively work with the learning content
within the context of medieval Amsterdam.
Although we also expected to find motivational
effects of playing the game, no significant differences
were found between the different interventions with
respect to motivation for History in general or the
Middle Ages in particular. This is striking in light of the
fact that motivation is commonly considered the argument
for the use of game-based learning in education.
However, our definition of motivation was much more
specific than the definitions used in the research we
read. That is, we specifically examined motivation for
the subject of History, whereas researchers define motivation
in terms of fun and/or engagement (e.g. Schwabe
& Göth 2005).
In retrospect, it might be that playing the Frequency
1550 game for only one day is simply not enough to
establish clear motivational effects. It is also possible
that the technical problems may be partly responsible
for the lack of effects on pupil motivation although
separate analyses for those days with lots of technical
problems versus those days with considerably fewer
technical problems produced about the same results.
Nonetheless, technical failures were clearly observed to
be responsible for many instances of disengaged behaviour
throughout the study days. In future research, more
and earlier tests of technology should be performed in
order to prevent technical failures to intervene with
learning and motivational effects. Finally, many of the
pupils did not complete one of the post-tests as it simply
was not administered in six of the 20 classes. Given that
the missing data was evenly distributed across the two
interventions, however, we do not think that the validity
of the present results and the conclusions to be drawn
was damaged. More data might have revealed some
smaller but significant effects, however.
Mobile game-based learning in secondary education 341
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
In light of the hypothesis that game-based learning
might work differently for pupils with a low level of
education or initially low History ability, we also investigated
the possibility of interaction effects. The results
showed pupils from the higher levels of education to
benefit more from playing the Frequency 1550 game
than pupils from the lower levels. Stated differently:
Those pupils with a lower level of education benefited
less from the Frequency 1550 game than those pupils
with a higher level of education. Conversely, those
pupils with an initially low History ability benefited
more from playing the Frequency 1550 game than
pupils with a higher level of initial History ability. That
is, the Frequency 1550 game appears to be particularly
worthwhile for pupils with an initially low History
ability, and for pupils attending higher educational
levels.
While the present study was not about the efficiency
of teaching, it should be noted that the regular projectbased
lesson series involved only two class hours (of
fifty minutes each), whereas the Frequency 1550 game
involved the entire day. Despite the fact that the pupils
who played the Frequency 1550 game required time for
explanation of the technical aspects of the game and
considerable time for navigation through the city and
the search for the areas of the city, the pupils playing
the game probably still had more learning time than
those receiving the regular lesson series. In the present
study, however, we were primarily interested in the
effectiveness and not the efficiency of game-based
learning.
While the Frequency 1550 game was shown to
clearly promote knowledge of medieval Amsterdam, it
is not clear which elements of the game contributed to
pupil learning. For example, was the ‘digital part’ of the
game accountable for the results, or was it primarily the
‘location part’, the opportunity for pupils to learn in
location? The use of ICT in education has been influenced
by several learning theories including behavioural
learning theory, cognitive learning theory and
social learning theory and thus has roots in work of
Dewey, Piaget and Vygotsky. In their constructivist
approaches to learning with technology, Jonassen et al.
(1999) and Barak (2006) have described learning principles
which involve a synthesis of several learning
theories. It is argued, for example, that ICT may only
promote meaningful learning when the learners are
actively engaged in learning which is constructive, contextual,
reflective and social. Unravelling games – and
perhaps mobile games in particular – into their constituent
learning principles should thus be part of future educational
research as only then, in our opinion, can we
claim that mobile games constitute an excellent means
to combine situated, active and constructive learning
with fun.
For future research, it is suggested that the effects of
game-based learning when pupils not only play the
game but are also involved in the creation of the game,
which allows more space for individual story construction
and the addition of elements of own interest, be
studied in particular. Such learner-centred production
was not a part of the design of the Frequency 1550
game as pupils played a game which was developed
by someone else with rules, goals, objectives, identities,
a story line and assignments which could only be
minimally influenced by the player/learner. The potential
of game creation for educational purposes has yet
to be addressed, thus, while it is just this which has
taken the newly developed Games Atelier – which
allows pupils to create and play their own games in
their own urban environment via mobile phones, GPS
and the Internet – one step further. Players-asproducers
obviously emphasizes the more creative and
constructive role of the learner and may therefore
enhance learning effects and also trigger greater motivation
on the part of pupils relative to the Frequency
1550 game, thus.
In conclusion the present research has shown a
mobile game-based learning strategy to be highly effective
when compared to a regular project-based instructional
trajectory and highlighted promising new
directions for future research along these lines.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Gijs Determeijer, Josephine de
Groot, Aske Hopman, Kristel Kerstens and Henk van
Zeijts of the Waag Society Amsterdam for their help
with this research. We would also like to thank Hein
Butteling, Martin Rodermans and Mark Souwer who
were the co-ordinators for the schools involved and
Wim Aerns, Merwien Best, Neline Kuipers, Carlien
Moeljono and HuibertTeekens who were the teachers in
the schools involved. We would also like to thank two
anonymous referees for their detailed comments on an
earlier draft of this article.
342 J. Huizenga et al.
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
References
Barak M. (2006) Instructional principles for fostering learning
with ICT: teachers’ perspectives as learners and instructors.
Education and Information Technologies 11, 121–
138.
Beck J. & Wade M. (2006) The Kids are Alright: How the
Gamer Generation is Changing the Workplace. Harvard
Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Brown J.S., Collins A. & Duguid P. (1989) Situated cognition
and the culture of learning. Educational Researcher 18,
32–41.
Cito (1987) Belevingschaal voor Wiskunde [Perception Scale
for Math]. Cito, Arnhem, The Netherlands.
Clark R.E. & Feldon D.F. (2005) Five common but questionable
principles of multimedia learning. In Cambridge
Handbook of Multimedia Learning (ed. R.E. Mayer),
pp. 97–116. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.
Cohen J. (1988) Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioural
Sciences, 2nd edition. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Hillsdale, NJ.
Csíkszentmihályi M. (1990) Flow: The Psychology of
Optimal Experience. Harper and Row, NewYork.
Dempsey J., Lucassen B, Haynes L. & Casey M. (1996)
Instructional applications of computer games. Paper presented
to the American Educational Research Association,
8–12April 1996, NewYork. ERIC Document Reproduction
Service No ED 394 550.
van Eck R. (2006) It’s not just the digital natives who are restless.
Available at: http://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/
erm0620.pdf (last accessed 8August 2008).
Egenfeldt-Nielsen S. (2005) Beyond edutainment: exploring
the educational potential of computergames. [Electronic
doctoral dissertation]. Available at: http://www.itu.dk/
people/sen/egenfeldt.pdf (last accessed 10 December
2007).
Egenfeldt-Nielsen S. (2006) Overview of research on the educational
use of video games. Tidsskriftet Digital Kompetanse
[Nordic Journal of Digital Literacy] 1, 184–213.
Fletcher J.D. & Tobias S. (2006) Using computer games and
simulations for instruction: a research review. Paper presented
at the Society for Applied Learning Technology
Meeting, February 8–10, Orlando, FL.
de Freitas S. (2006) Learning in immersiveworlds: a reviewof
game-based learning. Available at: http://www.jisc.ac.uk/
media/documents/programmes/elearninginnovation/
gamingreport_v3.pdf (last accessed 10 August 2008).
Garris R., Ahlers R. & Driskell J.E. (2002) Games, motivation,
and learning: a research and practice model. Simulation
& Gaming 33, 441–467.
Gee J.P. (2003) What video games have to teach us about
learning and literacy. ACM Computers in Entertainment 1,
1–4.
Gros B. (2007) Digital games in education: the design of
game-based learning environments. Journal of Research on
Technology in Education 40, 23–38.
Habgood M.P.J. (2007) The Effective Integration of Digital
Games and Learning Content. Unpublished Dissertation,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
Hays R.T. (2005) The effectiveness of instructional games: a
literature review and discussion. Available at: http://
handle.dtic.mil/100.2/ADA441935 (last accessed 20
August 2008).
Herweijer L. (2008) Gestruikeld voor de start: de school verlaten
zonder startkwalificatie. [Stumbling before the start:
Leaving school without an initial qualification] Available
at: http://www.scp.nl/publicaties/boeken/9789037703399/
Gestruikeld%20voor%20de%20start.pdf (last accessed 4
September 2008).
Jonassen D., Peck K.&Wilson B. (1999) Learning with Technology:
A Constructivist Approach. Prentice Hall, Upper
Saddle River, NJ.
Jonassen J.T.&Blondal K.S. (2005) Early school leavers and
the dropout issue in Europe. Available at: http://www3.
hi.is/~jtj/greinar/Back%20on%20track%20JTJ%20og%
20Stella%202005.pdf (last accessed 04 September 2008).
Kanfer R. & McCombs B.L. (2000) Motivation: applying
current theory to critical issues in training. In Training and
Retraining: A Handbook for Business, Industry, Government
and the Military (eds S. Tobias & J.D. Fletcher),
pp. 85–108. Macmillan, NewYork.
Kirriemuir J. & McFarlane A. (2004) Report 8: Literature
Review in Games and Learning. NESTA Future Lab series.
Available at: http://www.futurelab.org.uk/download/pdfs/
research/lit_reviews/Games_Review1.pdf (last accessed
18 January 2009).
Klopfer E. (2008) Augmented Learning: Research and Design
of Mobile Educational Games. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Klopfer E. & Squire K. (2008) Environmental detectives – the
development of an augmented reality platform for environmental
simulations. Educational Technology Research and
Development 56, 203–228.
Klopfer E., Squire K. & Jenkins H. (2002) Environmental
detectives: PDAs as a window into a virtual simulated
world. Available at: http://website.education.wisc.edu/
kdsquire/manuscripts/german-chapter.doc (last accessed
21 August 2008).
Lave J. & Wenger E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate
Peripheral Participation. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Mobile game-based learning in secondary education 343
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Lombardi M. (2007) Authentic learning for the 21st Century:
an overview. Educause Learning Initiative, ELI Paper
1/2007.Available at: http://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/
ELI3009.pdf (last accessed 28 May 2008).
Malone T.W. & Lepper M.R. (1987) Making learning fun: a
taxonomic model of intrinsic motivations for learning. In
Aptitude, Learning, and Instruction: III. Cognitive and
Affective Process Analysis (eds R.E. Snow & M.J. Farr),
pp. 223–253. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Mitchell A. & Savill-Smith C. (2004) The Use of Computer
and Video Games for Learning. Learning and Skills Development
Agency, London.
OCW [the Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Sciences].
(2007) Factsheet Voortijdig Schoolverlaten:
November 2007. [Factsheet leaving school prematurely:
November 2007] Available at: http://www.
voortijdigschoolverlaten.nl/userfiles/file/
factsheetsnovember2007.pdf (last accessed 4 September
2008).
Prensky M. (2001) Digital Game-Based Learning. McGraw-
Hill, NewYork.
Sandfort S., Ulicsak M., Facer K. & Rudd T. (2006) Teaching
with games: using commercial off-the-shelf computer
games in formal education. Available at: http://
www.futurelab.org.uk/resources/documents/
project_reports/teaching_with_games/TWG_report.pdf
(last accessed 18 January 2009).
Schwabe G. & Göth C. (2005) Mobile learning with a mobile
game: design and motivational effects. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning 21, 204–216.
Shaffer D. (2006) How Computer Games Help Children
Learn. Palgrave Macmillan, NewYork.
Squire K. (2004) Replaying history: learning world history
through playing. Civilization III. [Electronic doctoral dissertation]
Available at: http://website.education.wisc.edu/
kdsquire/dissertation.html (last accessed 12 June 2006).
Strauss A.L. & Corbin J. (1998) Basics of Qualitative
Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing
Grounded Theory. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks,
CA.
Watson W. (2007) Formative research on an instructional
design theory for educational video games. Available at:
http://www.indiana.edu/~syschang/decatur/documents2/
formative_resrch_isd-theory_edvideogames.pdf (last
accessed 5 September 2008).
344 J. Huizenga et al.
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd