Traffic growth due to mass proliferation of smart mobile
devices and 4G and beyond wireless technologies is motivating
a 5-10-fold increase in wireless cell sites to support small cell
deployments as well as future-proof fiber-optic backhaul of the
bandwidth-demanding mobile front-haul traffic. The global
trend to provide multi-gigabit wireless access speed is to
efficiently use the combination of WiFi networks and smallcell
deployment. Due to the conflict between drastic growth of
mobile data traffic and the limited wireless spectral resources
at conventional RF bands for both cellular and WiFi networks,
more aggressive spectral reuse (through small-cell deployment)
and new spectral exploration (at higher RF bands) are the two
main directions for the next-generation high-speed wireless
access networks. By reducing the cell size, limited spectral
resources can be reused among small cells more frequently,
thus enhancing the total system capacity. On the other hand, by
exploiting higher radio frequencies, e.g., millimeter-wave
bands, much more spectra are available that can easily support
multi-gigabit wireless transmission without requiring timeconsuming
and complicated modulation and coding schemes.
Due to the limited transmission range at higher RF bands, the
combination of small-cell architecture and higher RF provides
a promising solution to drastically increase the cellular system
capacity through frequency exploitation and reuse. The similar
trend observed for next-generation WiFi networks, where highRF
band has been considered in the 802.11ad standard. To
support small cells and next-generation WiFi netowrks, optical
fibers rather than copper cables are considered as ideal
backhaul media to provide sufficient bandwidth as well as
future-proof capacity upgrade. Therefore, optical-wireless
integrated technologies for the next-generation WiFi and 5G
small-cell wireless communications become an important topic
and require strong interdisciplinary research efforts. In this
paper, we will introduce several key enabling technologies for
next-generation WiFi and 5G small-cell systems. A cloud radio
access network architecture based on microwave-photonics
techniques is described for next-generation high-speed wireless
access systems.