Effective parking management begins with having the right set of tools at your disposal. Our smartphones and associated software have been designed with our clients in mind; each product undergoes extensive user testing and is further refined to the requirements of our client-led Steering Group. 

With over 30 years¡¯ experience as the UK's leading parking technology provider, we have developed software to optimise your customers' parking experience. 

Smartphones
Our powerful smartphones gives you a multifunctional, cost effective and lightweight solution. We can provide a range of units or you can purchase your own - our software is compatible with all current and future models. 

Using the smartphone as a parking management device has many benefits: 

Lightweight and user friendly - Patrol officers immediately feel comfortable using a smartphone rather than a large handheld computer.

Multi-functional - The device can be used as a phone, web browser and email client so that patrol officers need only carry one tool. However, this additional functionality can be locked down if preferred. 

16 MP camera - Your photographic evidence will be clear and concise. 

Rialto is innovative PCN issuing software developed specifically for Android. It simplifies the enforcement process with a user-friendly experience. Rialto is a client-led solution, being launched after extensive testing and refinement in partnership with Parking Associates and the City of London. 

Fast and accurate data entry improves parking management efficiency. 

The system is easily configured to suit the specific requirements and priorities of your site. Rialto is also perfect for multi-site or zonal operations as each zone can be configured with its own rules ? no need for multiple handhelds. 

ScanSmarti 
ScanSmarti allows you to harness the latest mobile ANPR technology at the touch of a button and to transform efficiencies across your entire parking operation. ScanSmarti enables complete car parks to be scanned by a patrol officer without the need to break a stride or to enter registration numbers manually - significantly speeding up the parking management process. 

ScanSmarti interfaces in real-time with PermitSmarti, VoucherSmarti and any cashless parking system, automatically identifying non-compliant parking.
 
ScanSmarti checks against payment in real-time. Where there is no record of payment or where payment has expired, ScanSmarti will prompt the patrol officer to issue a PCN or a warning notice. 

It will also notify the patrol officer if a vehicle registration is known to belong to a persistent offender, so that appropriate action can be taken. 
GeoSmarti smartphone management software enables you to manage your patrol officer beats in real time.  

Real-time location updates, patrolling officer positions and PCNs issued are displayed on the map, providing geovisualisation of your traffic management strategy.

GeoSmarti is the ultimate in-depth parking management tool for senior members of staff. 

 