Deep Aero ? Taking Drone Technology to the Next Level

Deep Aero has the innovative vision of building a blockchain and AI-powered drone economy with autonomous capabilities to transform urban transportation. To this end, the company is planning to offer efficient cargo delivery and passenger services.

About Deep Aero

Deep Aero was founded in October 2017 and has its headquarters in Ajman, United Arab Emirates. The company has the objective of becoming a global leader in innovation surrounding the drone technology space.

Drones, also known as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), essentially refer to aircraft without human pilots onboard. They usually make use of a controller on the ground and a communication system to act as a link between them. Different drones operate with varying levels of autonomy using either a remote control or built-in computer systems to steer them to the destination.

In the past, they were too expensive for the general populace, and their use was therefore restricted to research projects or government agencies. Such limitations meant that they would rarely come into contact with other air traffic eliminating the need for advanced management systems.

But as technology advances, production costs have gone down making them more readily accessible and subsequently increasing the level of risk that they pose. Unfortunately, the current air traffic ecosystem has not evolved to keep up with the changing needs for better management and control.

The Deep Aero Project

With this in mind, it has developed an innovative approach to revolutionize the space and streamline service provision and operations. Deep Aero is carrying out in-depth research into prototype innovations and technologies including dynamic geo-fencing, airspace design, route planning, sequencing and spacing, re-routing and contingency management among others.

Drone UTM

Drone UTM is an AI-based autonomous and self-governing system that has what it takes to transform the drone industry. Using the Deep Aero air traffic management framework, the platform is planning to facilitate autonomous control of drones and manned aircraft that have to co-exist on shared airspace.

Deep Aero¡¯s system will incorporate a registration and identity framework that will uniquely identify all relevant stakeholders, e.g. pilots and operators. Other details such as flight planning and authorization, geo-fencing and situational data will also be taken care of on the autonomous system.

Drone Marketplace

Another outstanding aspect of the project is the Deep Drone Marketplace that seeks to offer every conceivable product and service related to drones. Users will have the opportunity to book drone taxis, rent and purchase drones for their projects, hire specialist operators and buy parts and accessories with ease.

A mobile device app will allow users to access these products and services, communicating with operators for quick and hassle-free transportation or cargo delivery right to their doorstep.

So as to make the project a success, Deep Aero will be working closely with the leading players in the drone industry, including manufacturers such as Workhorse, Ehang, Autonomous Passenger Drone and Volocopter. This collaboration will facilitate the successful launch of a drone taxi service on the platform which will ease commute times for urban dwellers.

The Team

The Deep Aero team is made up of professionals with years of experience in various relevant fields, offering diverse skills from their different backgrounds. They have a good outreach in the blockchain community and are a sufficient size given the scope of the project.

Gurmeet Singh is the CEO and founder of the project and comes with years of skills in drone technology.

Project CFO Mayank Jain is a graduate from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India as well as a Bachelor¡¯s in Commerce from the Delhi University. He has years of experience in accountancy and entrepreneurship and a passion for emerging technologies.

The company¡¯s vice president of sales marketing, Harsh Sharma, studied at the European Management Institute and has a wealth of experience in marketing IT solutions.

Token Sale Details

In order to develop the platform and achieve its objectives, Deep Aero has scheduled an ICO that kicked off on May 1st, 2018 and will be running up until June 1st, 2018. The project has a total token supply of 5 billion DRONES, of which 2.5 billion will be available for purchase during the token sale. 1.25 billion tokens have been set aside for the founders, 500 million for its advisors, a further 500 million for the pre-sale (already took place from March 30thto April 15th) and the remaining 250 million for marketing purposes. The tokens are being sold at the rate of $0.05 each.

Further details about the project and its ongoing ICO are available on the official website.

Disclaimer: This article should not be taken as, and is not intended to provide, investment advice. Global Coin Report and/or its affiliates, employees, writers, and subcontractors are cryptocurrency investors and from time to time may or may not have holdings in some of the coins or tokens they cover. Please conduct your own thorough research before investing in any cryptocurrency and read our full disclaimer.

Image courtesy of Pexels

