How Evolving Mobile Device Technology is Changing Market Research

Mobile continues to be the dominant channel for technology. Pew Internet estimates that 95% of Americans own a cellphone, and 77% have a smartphone. It¡¯s not just ownership?it¡¯s consumer behaviors which make mobile such an important channel. Inc reports the average user looks at their mobile phone 150 times per day, and one key research agency has shifted 75% of their research to mobile. From the potential to conduct mobile visual ethnography to geo-location-powered research, market research is still exploring and pushing the boundaries of mobile¡¯s potential.

GPS Features Drive Geo-location Research
GPS features track and report the geographic location of a smartphone. Building on this, researchers have developed a number of technologies, such as geo-fencing, which leverage location data to target consumers with survey notifications. Currently, when a consumer enters a retail store with this technology, they may be notified about a relevant coupon or asked to participate in a brief survey about their experience. As the technology matures, geo-location technologies are likely to make it easier to conduct in-depth in-situ research, track more granular consumer information, and implement more sophisticated data validation techniques. Other innovations, such as those including wearable devices, are sure to follow.

Video and Film Capabilities Change Mobile Diaries, Ethnography, and More
Most mobile phones can record video and audio, take pictures, and even transform into virtual reality devices with a simple add-on. Researchers are using these features to collect more data-rich input from survey participants, re-imagine the possibilities of certain types of research, and offer multimedia content to their surveys. There are still some limitations due to people¡¯s inability or unwillingness to use these functions, or limitations which relate to lower amounts of available data. However, as unlimited data usage becomes more prevalent across service providers, these issues will be less of a concern.

SMS Messages and Push Notifications Change Engagement
One of the main uses for mobile phones is texting, and market researchers have learned to take advantage of that?especially for low-bandwidth international market research environments. At the same time, push notifications are making it easier to engage with consumers and get them to take surveys when they are in certain locations. Using SMS messages and push notifications, researchers can connect more easily with survey respondents, and as consumers become more accustomed to these notifications, participation is likely to increase.

Passive Data Collection Becomes Easier
Market research data is being enriched by myriad data streams. Big data and market research often combine in a company¡¯s data strategy to help reach their target audience more effectively, and passive data collection on smartphones makes it easy to collect and verify information without disrupting the participant experience. For example, if a smartphone records location, timestamps, or date information automatically and shares that with researchers, it helps eliminate non-essential questions from surveys, and streamlines the research process.

Changing the Nature of Participant Recruitment
People¡¯s relationships with their mobile phones make it easier to connect. Whether it¡¯s reaching a busy executive on their daily commute for a B2B survey, or using notifications to recruit participants for a retail survey, mobile phones have made it easier to connect with a wider cross-section of participants. As ownership percentages continue to increase?particularly for smartphones?this will continue to simplify recruiting and make it possible to field surveys more quickly and on tighter budgets.
As mobile phones and other mobile devices continue to evolve, new features are going to make it easier to reach consumers. In addition to streamlining participation, mobile phone features are making it possible for researchers to expand their approaches to data collection. From using video to be in the moment with consumers as they make decisions, to leveraging geo-location technology to track participant¡¯s locations, mobile technology is enriching market research. The moment to embrace mobile market research has arrived.