The best smartphone of 2018: 15 top mobile phones tested and ranked
By Gareth Beavis 4 days ago Mobile phones  

The best smartphone right now is the Samsung Galaxy S9 Plus
 
We're reaching the middle of 2018, and now our calendars have flipped to June we've nearly checked out all the top phones from the first half of the year.

Advertisement

That's good, because there are so many choices out there that it can be tough to know which one to go for... the very reason you're here, perhaps.

TechRadar spends an exhausting amount of time testing the latest and best smartphones on the market, working out which has the best camera, the top screen, sumptuous design and a useful battery life and bringing you the results in our in-depth reviews.

We've had a couple of new entries this week, and they're something a bit special: smartphones that pack top-end spec but do so at a price that has the big players worried, often undercutting them by up to 66% while offering relatively comparable performance.

The OnePlus 6 and Honor 10 both join the fray, and you'll need to have a whizz through the list to see where they land - but it's pretty impressive, given the lower price.

If you're looking for something more targeted and know your top operating system, then there's our best iPhone or best Android phone guides, or even the best Samsung phones if you're loyal to that brand.

Right now, as you can probably tell, the best smartphone right now is the Samsung Galaxy S9 Plus - a perfect combination of all the things we look for in a phone and showing Samsung still knows how to make a great phone.

These phones are the best of the best and while we do take price into account if you're looking for something more on a budget, then head to our best cheap phones page to get some other recommendations.

Image 1 of 5

1. Samsung Galaxy S9 Plus
The best smartphone around

Release date: March 2018 | Weight: 189g | Dimensions: 158.1 x 73.8 x 8.5mm | OS: Android 8 | Screen size: 6.2-inch | Resolution: 1440 x 2960 | CPU: Snapdragon 845 / Exynos 9810 | RAM: 6GB | Storage: 64GB/128GB | Battery: 3,500mAh | Rear camera: Dual 12MP | Front camera: 8MP

$794.44
VIEW AT AMAZON MARKETPLACE
$799.99
View at Amazon
$799.99
View at Amazon
?
See all prices (20 found)
Super premium buildExcellent low-light camerasBattery doesn't last as well as some others on the list
The Samsung Galaxy S9 Plus is a big phone that's designed for big hands - and it takes the very best of what's on the smartphone market and puts it together in a compelling package that we've loved testing, despite the strong competition on the following pages.

Advertisement

Screen: The Super AMOLED 6.2-inch display has been measured as one of the very best around right now, with super colours, great dynamic range and, essentially, the very best viewing experience you can have on a mobile phone.

Battery life: The battery life on the S9 Plus is better than that seen on the smaller S9, thanks to the 3,500mAh battery in the Plus model - although it's probably the weakest part of the phone, not offering as much life as we'd have liked.

Camera: The camera on the Galaxy S9 Plus is among the best on the market, and the dual-aperture capability offers some startlingly good snaps when things get a little darker. 

Colours can look a tad washed out when the exposure is higher, but the power of the sensor, with memory built into it to make it smarter than most rivals, offers very low-noise shots.

Mini verdict: If you're after a bigger phone with all the features that matter on board, the Galaxy S9 Plus is that and more.