Resurrection of Old RPG Games as New Mobile Games
Mar 23, 2018

Webzen is planning to release its mobile game called ¡®MU Origin 2¡¯ sometime during the first half. Starting from the 20th, Webzen started CBT (Closed Beta Test) on limited number of people and it is going to start open test for general people starting from April.
MU Origin 2 is a mobile game that is based on Webzen¡¯s online game called ¡®MU Online¡¯. Its beta test is currently in place in China since January under the name of ¡®MU: Awakening¡¯. It has drawn huge amount of popularity by attracting advance reservation from more than 10 million people.
Gravity released ¡®Ragnarok M¡¯, which is currently on the fourth place based on sales and is based on an online game called Ragnarok, in March.
When MU Origin 2 is released, it is certain that it will be at the top on sales ranking in South Korean markets. ¡®MU Origin¡¯, which was released in South Korea in 2015, recorded number one on sales rankings of Google, Apple, and ONE store.
MU Origin contributed to increased popularity of mobile MMORPGs (Massively Multiplayer Online Role Playing Game) such as ¡®Lineage II Revolution¡¯ and ¡®Lineage M¡¯ that were released starting from end of 2016.
Currently, ¡®Lineage M¡¯, ¡®Black Desert Mobile¡¯, ¡®Lineage II Revolution¡¯, and ¡®Ragnarok M¡¯ are at the top four spots in South Korean mobile markets.
These mobile games are generally based on IPs (Intellectual Property) of old games that were popular in South Korea and other Asian countries between late 1990s and early 2000s. ¡®Black Desert (2nd place)¡¯ and ¡®AxE (11th place) are the only few games that are based on new IPs and maintaining top spots of GooglePlay¡¯s sales ranking.
Lineage, MU Online, Ragnarok, and Lineage II were released in 1998, 2001, 2002, and 2004 respectively. 
Reason why old games are recording such high amount of sales as mobile games are because it is easier to market them since there are already many people who have played such games.
Lineage II Revolution set a new record by attracting advance reservation from 3.5 million people before it was released, and this record was broken by Lineage M (5 million people) in just half of a year. Ragnarok M also attracted advance reservation from 2 million people with just advertisements.
Fact that old games, which have resurrected themselves as mobile games, are RPGs is another element that is advantageous for huge popularity.
Not only RPGs have high APRU (Average Revenue Per User) due to their characteristics but they also do not have limited monthly payments ($465) that exist for online games and they do not prevent auto play system. Their play settings were also improved as web players, which allow people to enjoy mobile games on PCs, were generalized recently.
However fact that most of IPs of old games are developed by Chinese game developers is a weakness of South Korean game industry.
MU Origin series were developed mostly by Tianma Shikong. Ragnarok M is also a game developed by a Chinese game developer. South Korean game developers are at unfavorable settings as they have to share profits with Chinese game developers that also have upper hands in development of these games.
¡°Medium-sized South Korean game developers lack fund and manpower to develop mobile MMORPGs on their own.¡± said a representative for a game industry. ¡°Although this is an example of an effective management as of now, but it is certain that South Korean game industry will begin lose its competitive edge once this type of structure continues in the future.¡±