Samsung Galaxy Tab S3 Is Finally Getting Android 8.0 Oreo In The US

The Samsung Galaxy Tab S3 is finally getting an upgrade to Android 8.0 Oreo in the United State.

The Galaxy Tab S3 launched last year as a premium tablet with high-end specifications and a high price tag to boot, but it's been left on Android Nougat up until recently.

Samsung started pushing the Android 8.0 Oreo update to its flagship smartphones a while ago and rolled it out even to mid-range devices such as the Galaxy A3, while the Galaxy Tab S3 was left out.

The tablet finally started getting the Android 8.0 Oreo update in the UK a couple of weeks ago, and now the rollout has reached the United States.

Samsung Galaxy Tab S3 Android 8.0 Oreo Update
The update that is currently rolling out to Galaxy Tab S3 units in the United States is quite hefty, weighing as much as 1.23 GB. The build is so large because it not only brings Android 8.0 Oreo but also Samsung's latest Experience 9.0 updates and the Android security patch for April. Other devices have already received the May security patch, but the Galaxy Tab S3 is still a bit behind in this area.

Jumping from Android Nougat to Oreo will bring a new notification system, refreshed icons, and colors, autofill APIs, and plenty of other tweaks designed to improve the overall experience. Also in the mix are a new Samsung SmartThings app, a new home screen, and an updated keyboard.

Samsung Galaxy Tab S3 Specs
As a reminder, the Samsung Galaxy Tab S3 is a large slate with a 9.7-inch HDR Super AMOLED display, sporting a high resolution of 2,048 x 1,536 pixels. It features a sleek metal and glass construction and packs a Snapdragon 820 chipset under the hood or an Exynos chipset outside the United States.

Other Galaxy Tab S3 specs include 4 GB of RAM, 32 GB of internal storage, expandable via microSD, a 13-megapixel main camera, a 5-megapixel front shooter, a USB Type-C port, and a 6,000 mAh battery to keep things up and running.

While it's no longer among the latest tablets, it's still among the best in its category and the update to Android 8.0 Oreo now makes it more appealing.

As always, before proceeding with the update, it's best to ensure that the tablet is at least 50 percent charged and that it's connected to a stable network. Downloading and installing the update via Wi-Fi is recommended, as doing so over mobile data could incur extra charges.